























































World Bank Document



PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA61676

Project Name Integrated Dairy Productivity Improvement Project (P155412)
Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Country Kyrgyz Republic
Sector(s) Animal production (70%), General finance sector (20%), Agro-

industry, marketing, and trade (10%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Rural policies and 

institutions (25%), Trade facilitation and market access (25%), 
Micro, S mall and Medium Enterprise support (15%), Climate 
change (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P155412
Borrower(s) Kyrgyz Republic
Implementing Agency Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 11-Apr-2016
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Apr-2016
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

08-Apr-2016

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

02-Jun-2016

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

I. Project Context
Country Context
With GNI per capita of US$1,269 (2014), the Kyrgyz Republic is one of the low income economies 
of the Europe and Central Asia Region. In 2014, approximately 30.6% of the population lived 
below the poverty line, with the incidence of poverty slightly higher in rural area than in urban 
areas (32.6% vs. 26.9%). Economic growth in the country has been quite volatile. GDP growth was 
6% in 2011 but contracted to 0.9% in 2012, owing to a sharp drop in gold output. In 2013, the 
economy grew at a whopping 10.9%, but slowed to 3.6% in 2014 and remained at 3.5% at the end 
of 2015. The narrow export base is dominated by gold, with agricultural products representing on 
average 16% of total exports from 2009 to 2013. The economy is highly vulnerable to external 
shocks, in particular many households depend on remittances from the energy-based economies of 
Russia and Kazakhstan. It is partially dependent on wheat imports from Kazakhstan and the past 
global food price shocks quickly transmitted to the country. The official unemployment rate in the 
country has hovered below 10% for the past decade, however mostly on account of significant 
outmigration of labor force (predominantly men, a majority from rural areas) to Russia and 
Kazakhstan. The recent economic difficulties of Russia and the strong devaluation of the ruble have 
negatively affected the earnings of the migrants and their remittances to their families in 
Kyrgyzstan.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture is an important sector for the Kyrgyz Republic’s economy and livestock production is a 
major livelihood support system for rural people. Agriculture represents about 15% of GDP, and it 
is still a major employer, providing more than a third of jobs. The sector’s growth rate in 2015 was 
a relatively high 6.2%. Agriculture is a key priority for the government because of its contribution 
to poverty reduction and rural employment. Livestock production, which accounts for about 50% of 
the agricultural GDP, is dominated by household and small farm production. It is important for 
rural household food security, nutrition, regular income generation, and acts as a social safety net 
with animals sold in times of hardship and economic distress. The primary land use of the country 
is native pasture production (87% of the total land is under pastures), which provides an advantage 
for livestock-based livelihood and food security for the rural population.  
 
With the accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU), the country’s 
agriculture sector is facing new challenges, and also new opportunities. The Kyrgyz Republic 
became a full member of the EAEU in May 2015. The EAEU includes Russia and Kazakhstan, 
which are the Kyrgyz Republic’s main export markets. However, since 2012, a partial dairy export 
ban has been in force, limiting the number of dairy exporters to seven (more information in 
paragraph 7 below). The Kyrgyz dairy producers and processors may be unable to capitalize on new 
market opportunities due to their inability to meet the animal health, food safety and quality 
standards of the EAEU. However, Kyrgyz dairy products benefit from a reputation of better taste 
due to the production model based on natural pastures. Addressing current constraints in the Kyrgyz 
dairy sector would allow to capitalize on new market opportunities, as well as on the achievements 
and initiatives of the previous and ongoing projects in the agriculture sector.  
 
Market opportunities for Kyrgyz milk and dairy products. The demand for Kyrgyz dairy products, 
in particular in Kazakhstan, is significant. Even though the border is closed to most of the official 
dairy exports (only seven companies can export dairy products to Kazakhstan), informal trade is 
booming. While the official value of exports of milk/dairy products in 2012 was US$30 million 
(equivalent to 4% of the annual milk production volume), the unofficial export revenues were 
closer to US$ 100 million (14% of the milk production volume). Russia is also considered a 
potentially large export market for dairy products (in particular, cheese). Once milk quality is 
upgraded, exporting to other countries (such as China, Afghanistan and Pakistan) should be 
possible.  
 
The Kyrgyz dairy sector is primarily dependent on smallholder private dairy units with an average 
herd size of 3-5 heads of cattle. Around 60% of the rural population own livestock, but the average 
herd size tends to be small. Milk is an important part of the diet and around 90% of the population 
consume dairy products regularly. In value terms, milk is one of the top five agricultural products of 
the country. Per capita availability of milk is around 193 kg and 25% of the milk produced is 
surplus, for processing and export. It should be noted, however, that farmers who keep animals do 
not consider themselves dairy farmers (animals are rather considered a subsistence livelihood 
source), and the animal breeding and management practices are poor, which accounts for low dairy 
sector productivity. 
 
Livestock productivity is low compared to countries with similar production conditions. 
Furthermore, productivity has been declining from 2,041 kg in 2009, to 2023 kg in 2012 and 2, 013 
kg in 2013.  Many factors cause this low productivity at the farm level: inadequate on-farm animal 
health management, poorly equipped laboratories and disease diagnostic services, irregular and 
incomplete vaccinations, low breed stock (genetic) quality, absence of sustainable breeding policies 
and practices, inadequate feeding, improper shed maintenance, and farm hygiene issues, overall 
poor knowledge of animal husbandry techniques, low level of investments into production and 
marketing infrastructure. Addressing these issues can significantly increase both the productivity 
and total output of milk, which would contribute to increasing producers’ incomes and help address 
the sourcing problems faced by dairy processors. Processors experience a shortage of clean and 
high quality milk, and as a result underutilize their processing capacities and forego additional 
incomes that could come from exporting to other countries, and primarily, to the neighboring 
Kazakhstan. Export bans have a multiplier effect, as they affect not only the processors but also the 
milk-selling farmers and households and other players in the value chain.  
 
The Kyrgyz Dairy Sector Development Program (KDSDP) was initiated with support from IFC’s 
advisory program in 2015, to help the country capitalize on market opportunities presented by the 
EAEU. The Program is designed to help ensure steady milk exports to Kazakhstan (and other 
countries) through a dairy value chain approach, which would enable farmers to receive steady and 
increased incomes for the milk. It has already started working by supporting dairy processors in 
Issyk-kul Region. However, issues related to animal health and low productivity continue to persist. 
To make value chain development successful, it is imperative that on-farm improvements as well as 
necessary public sector investments are supported to ensure high quality and increased volume of 
milk. Thus, the KDSDP has grown into a comprehensive program addressing the various 
bottlenecks affecting the dairy value chain. The program covers all aspects of the dairy value chain: 
cattle breed improvement, animal feed improvement, improvements of animal productivity and 
milk quality, extension education and outreach services, animal health and hygiene, milk collection 
upgrades, laboratory, disease diagnosis and testing capacity (animal disease control, food safety and 
milk quality) upgrades, processing capacity upgrades, food safety standard upgrades, enabling 
regulatory framework, and export promotion.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The Development Objective of the Project is to enhance dairy animal productivity and milk quality 
on beneficiary farms.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Strengthening Public and Private Services in the Dairy Sector
Comments (optional)
This component would contribute to the program development objective by improving the public-
private dialogue on private sector development issues, and by supporting the improvements in the 
breed stock (genetic quality) of the dairy cows. This component would focus on the following 
activities: (i) Improving the Public-Private Dialogue; (ii) cattle identification and registration in 
Issyk-kul Region; (iii) Establishment of a World Organization for Animal Health-certified Zone 


Free of Animal Diseases (with a focus on Foot and Mouth Disease in close collaboration with the 
Islamic Development Bank); and (iv) Support to Artificial Insemination (AI) Service Providers.
Component Name
Component 2: On-farm Productivity Enhancement
Comments (optional)
During Phase I, the Model Dairy Village (MDV) concept would be introduced, determining the 
locations of the MDV service points, and providing the initial support to these services. The 
component would start with the most-needed services (which could be a veterinarian, an AI office, a 
milking center, a milk collection point, etc.). It would work predominantly with groups of 
beneficiaries. It would provide training, demonstrations and advice to farmers on good animal 
breeding practices, including: (i) fodder production and feeding management; (ii) animal husbandry 
and farm management, including (a) animal housing, general management and handling; (b) animal 
health, farm hygiene & clean milk production; (c) breeding management; and (d) manure 
management; and (iii) milk cooling and handling.

Component Name
Component 3: Farm-level Investments
Comments (optional)
Phase I would finance: (i) a US$ 1.2 million Revolving Fund to facilitate access to finance for small 
farmer for the purchase of inputs and small equipment; and (ii) technical assistance and capacity 
building to project beneficiaries to enable them to access existing financing programs.

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management
Comments (optional)
The component would cover the costs associated with project management, including Monitoring 
and Evaluation for the project implementation, as well as the establishment and maintenance of the 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 5.00 Total Bank Financing: 5.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 2.75
IDA Grant 2.25
Total 5.00

V. Implementation
The Ministry of Agriculture and Melioration (MOAM) and the Ministry of Finance (MOF) would 
be the Implementing Agencies for the project. Both Ministries have prior extensive experience with 
implementation of Bank-financed projects.  
 
The Agribusiness Competitiveness Center (ABCC) reporting to MOAM, and the Credit Line 
Management Unit (CLMU) at MOF would be responsible for implementation of the technical 
assistance and credit line activities, respectively. Both implementing units have extensive 

experience in implementing Bank-financed projects. The technical assistance activities 
(Components 1 and 2) would be implemented through the ABCC, which has been successfully 
implementing technical assistance activities in the agriculture sector in three Bank-financed projects 
(Agribusiness and Marketing Project, Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project, and the JSDF-
financed Support to the Community Seed Funds Project). The Revolving Fund for farmers, farmer 
associations, agro-processors and traders would be managed by the CLMU which has successfully 
managed credit lines in three previous Bank-financed projects (Rural Finance II Project, 
Agribusiness and Marketing Project, and Agricultural Productivity Assistance Project).  Similar to 
the previous projects, procurement functions for the proposed project would be carried out by 
ABCC and the overall Financial Management would be the responsibility of CLMU. Safeguards 
support would be the responsibility of the ABCC. ABCC would also open a regional office in Issyk-
kul, where the technical staff and Environmental Specialist would be located. Both PMUs, but, in 
particular, ABCC would closely liaise with the other projects under the KDSDP, to ensure that all 
necessary activities are implemented, and no duplications occur.  
 
A Steering Committee would be set up to provide strategic guidance for project implementation, as 
well as ensure that key issues that need to be resolved are brought to the attention of the 
Government and their resolution facilitated. The Steering Committee would consist of 
representatives of the Prime Minister’s Office, MOAM, Ministry of Economic Regulation, MOF, 
Issyk-kul Oblast Governor’s Office, and private sector representatives. 
 
A consulting firm with international experience in dairy sector development, in particular, in 
working with farmers to improve on-farm productivity and milk quality, would be contracted under 
the project to support project implementation. The consultants would have the following main 
responsibilities: (i) identify the locations for the service points for the Dairy Model Villages 
(Component 2); (ii) provide training-of-trainers to local consulting companies that would train 
farmers in the project area (Component 2); (iii) provide advisory services to individual larger 
farmers; or groups of farmers, on specific areas related to the improvement of milk quality and 
quantity on beneficiary farms (Component 2); and (iv) assist ABCC in coordinating the project 
activities with other activities of the program, in particular, those financed by IsDB and other donors 
(Component 1 and Component 4).  
 
In addition, local consulting companies and/or NGOs would be hired under the project to ensure 
outreach to farmers, training and advisory services on the ground (under Component 2).  
 
Finally, a local consulting company or NGO experienced in group mobilization and group lending 
arrangements would be hired under the project to provide the necessary training to the groups of 
beneficiaries of the Revolving Fund, as well as help with ensuring collection of repayments due to 
the Revolving Fund (Component 3).

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA21011

Project Name Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project Additional 
Financing (P154238)

Parent Project Name Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P118518)
Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Country Moldova
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Agro-industry, 

marketing, and trade (50%)
Theme(s) Rural markets (100%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P154238
Parent Project ID P118518
Borrower(s) Government of Moldova
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 04-Mar-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 11-Mar-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

04-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

30-Mar-2015

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note)

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

I. Project Context
Country Context
Economic growth and poverty reduction gains achieved over the last decade in Moldova have been 
fueled by strong remittance flows that triggered increased, import-served consumption. The decade-
long growth has not been accompanied by an increase in employment. On the contrary, total 
employment in Moldova declined by 27 percent over the period 2000-2010. Agriculture released 
most of the labor that found jobs through internal and external outward migration. Another 
macroeconomic negative resulting from a consumption-led growth model was the buildup of an 
alarming trade deficit. With the value of imports more than triple to that of exports, the trade gap 
has reached over 50 percent of GDP in 2008. The fallout from the global crisis of 2008, as well as 
the lingering crisis in Europe and the Russian Federation in 2014 (key migration labor destinations), 
exposed the fragility of this growth model. As remittances declined, domestic demand fell by 10 % 
and the real economy contracted by 6% in 2009. Moldova’s quick recovery from the crisis in 2010 
and 2011 has been again largely based on the restored supply of remitances, but also on increased 

agricultural prices and growing exports. Remittance flows have not grown much in 2014, and are 
expected to stall in 2015 primarily due to the marked depreciation of the Russian Ruble, tighter 
labor migration controls and a slowing economy in the Russian Federation.  
 
The lessons from Moldova’s development pattern over the past decade, have underlined the critical 
need for a second engine of growth – the revival of exports. As Moldova’s working population 
declines, export-led growth needs to come from investment and improvements in productivity and 
competitiveness. The Government of Moldova recognizes the need for an investment- and export-
led engine of the growth based on on increased capital investments, innovation and 
competitiveness.  The National Development Strategy “Moldova 2020”, reinforces the 
Government's commitment to a development paradigm based on a dynamic model driven by 
domestic and foreign investment and export-oriented sectors. In addition, the Government's reforms 
in 2011-2014 focused on achieving closer trade integration with the European Union, which 
culminated in the conclusion of an Association Agreement between the Republic of Moldova and 
the European Union, complemented by a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement which 
came into effect on August 1, 2014. The latter, has brought about new and exciting opportunities 
for market diversification of the country's agro-food exports.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Recently, the country's shift to an export-led growth model has suffered a number of setbacks due 
to uncertainties with supply to the Russian market. Moldovan agricultural and food exports to the 
Russian Federation have been subject to various trade restrictions through 2013 and 2014 - starting 
with a ban on wines, followed by ban on meat and a nearly complete ban on fruits and vegetables, 
and canned goods. The most affected export items were wine, apples and plums. In 2013, prior to 
the bans, approximately thirty percent of the country's wine exports (valued at US$350 million), 
ninety three percent of apple exports (valued at US$43.7 million) and eighty percent of plum 
exports (valued at US$21.1) went to Russia.  The loss of the Russian Federation market represented 
a significant blow to horticulture in Moldova as there are few alternative markets for the agro-food 
produce, especially for apples and plums. There is very limited potential for meaningful import 
substitution. Moldovan imports of apples were only about 1,500 tons in 2013 (valued at US$1.34 
million) and imports of plums are negligible. Un-utilized processing capacity for apples and plums 
in the country is limited and has only absorbed additionally approximately 60,000 tons of apples 
and 40,000 tons of plums in 2014 (15% and 35% of output respectively). The resulting supply glut 
of apples and plums, compounded by an existing large stock of processed products has led to a 50% 
drop in the domestic market price for apples and plums. Similarly, as a result of the wine ban, and 
accumulating stocks in 2014, grapes are traded at 40% of the 2013 price.   
 
In recent years there have been significant productivity gains in the Moldovan horticulture sector 
due to significant investments and, these gains could easily be lost because of the impact of the 
Russian embargoes.  Productivity gains have contributed to a steady  increase in output and are 
likely to have come from stricter application of growing technologies, and/or replacement of old 
orchard/vineyards, more intensive production and use of modern technologies. This is a result of 
increased investment in the sector, which is a very positive development given Moldova’s 
comparative advantage in high value agriculture.  This transformation has been the result of a fairly 
long-drawn struggle, which is finally showing results. The embargos have the potential to have a 
major negative impact on fruit growers’ competitiveness by stalling, if not reversing, 
modernization, as a result of deteriorating financial standing and de-capitalization.   


 
The majority of fruit growers is represented by small peasant farmers (66% for apples, 69% for 
plums, 70% for vineyards) and provides significant rural employment and incomes, for an 
estimated 350,000 people. A large share of these jobs now are either at risk or are yielding 
significantly lower pay due to the impact of the embargo. The resulting social consequences could 
be severe, as the highest poverty rates are already registered among the agriculture-related 
population: 21.7 percent of farmers and 31.3 percent of agricultural workers have been found poor 
in 2013, these two categories accounting for 31 percent of country's poor.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The Project Development Objective is to enhance the competitiveness of the agro-food sector by 
supporting the modernization of the food safety management system, facilitating market access for 
farmers, and mainstreaming agro-environmental and sustainable land management practices.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Compensatory Sales Support Grants
Comments (optional)
The new component will finance targeted support to farmers with farms of less than or equal to 15 
hectares, who sold apple, plums and grapes domestically for processing in 2014. The grants will 
compensate the difference between the potential non-embargo price and the domestic sales price, 
with an aim of avoiding possible de-capitalization and collapse of the horticulture sector, thus giving 
it a much needed respite for reorientation to new markets and/or amortization of the financial losses.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 12.00 Total Bank Financing: 12.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 12.00
Total 12.00

V. Implementation
The parent - Agriculture Competitiveness Project (ACP) was approved by the Board on May 1, 
2012. It is financed by (i) an IDA credit in the amount of US$18.0 million; (ii) a fully-blended GEF 
grant of US$4.4 million; and (iii) a SIDA grant of US$3.0 million. The PDO is: to enhance the 
competitiveness of the country's agro-food sector by supporting the modernization of the food safety 
management system, facilitating market access for farmers, and mainstreaming agro-environmental 
and sustainable land management practices. The ACP has the following components: Component 1: 
Enhancing Food Safety Management; Component 2: Enhancing market access potential; 
Component 3: Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land management. The project 


became effective on September 24, 2012. The closing date for the ACP is June 30, 2017. 
 
The project was designed to contribute to the realization of the economic growth model described in 
the 2011-2014 Government Program aimed at enhancing export competitiveness, attracting 
investment and achieving closer trade integration with the EU. More specifically, the ACP is 
supporting the Government's ambitious efforts in reforming the food safety management system, 
efforts to improve farmers’ market opportunities through investment support (to bring about 
upgrades in post-harvesting infrastructure) and institutional development support (creation and 
strengthening of productive partnerships), and efforts to mainstream the use of good agricultural 
practices and sustainable land management.  
 
Project performance is currently rated “moderately satisfactory” for Implementation Progress (IP), 
“satisfactory” for the PDO, and “satisfactory” for procurement and financial management . Current 
commitments for the IDA credit stand at 70% , and generally progress continues to be solid across 
the project's three components at this phase of implementation.  Currently, disbursement under the 
IDA Credit is at US$3.6 million (20%), under the GEF grant at US$2.1 million (48%), and the 
SIDA grant at US$0.25 (8%). Disbursement rates under the IDA Credit are expected to reach 45% 
by the end of FY15. Procurement of goods, works and consulting services has considerably picked 
up in pace in 2014; calls for proposals for matching investment grants supporting the emergence of 
productive partnerships have been carried out and awards were made; capacity building activities 
have been increasing in scope and complexity. 
 
Component 1: Enhancing food safety management. There is solid progress in the implementation of 
this component. The country's Food Safety Agency, is a relatively new institution (established in 
2012) which has largely become functional due to the support of the project. Two major civil works 
activities are under way - the rehabilitation of the Food Safety Agency (FSA) building and the 
construction of the Border Inspection Point in Tudora on the country's Southern-Eastern border with 
Ukraine. Procurement of civil works for another three border inspection points - Leuseni (West), 
Giurgiulesti (South) and Criva (North) has been completed and works are expected to commence in 
the spring of 2015. Procurement of works for the construction of the country's national reference 
laboratory for safety of products of vegetable origin (Balti) has been completed. Capacity 
strengthening activities at the national reference laboratory for safety of products of animal origin 
and animal health aimed at future international accreditation are in full swing. Additionally, the FSA 
continues to receive support for legislative and regulatory improvements, capacity building 
activities, training and knowledge sharing with various European food safety institutions. 
 
Component 2: Enhancing market access potential. Progress in the implementation of this component 
has been very strong. One call for proposals for matching investment grants from emerging 
productive partnerships has been completed in the summer of 2014, and 8 producer groups received 
matching investment grant awards in an amount of US$2.1 million for a variety of investments in 
post-harvest processing of apples, table grapes and berries. A second call for proposals is currently 
under way until January 30, 2015. In parallel, outreach activities are under way to raise awareness 
about the project's opportunities for fruit and vegetable growers especially in light of on-going 
difficulties Moldovan agro-food exports have on the traditional Russian market, and a stringent need 
for reorientation of trade flows to different, more stable markets. 
 
Component 3: Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land management.  
Implementation of this component is progressing well. All activities related to the rehabilitation of 



protective shelter-belts are on schedule, and the equipment which was procured for these purposes is 
being utilized efficiently by two mobile mechanized agro-forestry squads. The component's 
sustainable land managed grant scheme has been launched and a first call for proposals yielded 
more than 80 applications that are currently under review. It is expected that about 30 awards will be 
made in the next few weeks, for an amount of approximately US$0.6 million.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖



























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSA20709

Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Maldives Project ID: P157801
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Sustainable Fisheries Resources Development Project (Fourth South West Indian 
Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth Project) (P157801)

Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

10-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

10-Apr-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Environment & Natural 
Resources

Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Government of Maldives
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
IDA Grant 1.50
IDA recommitted as a Grant 16.50
Financing Gap 0.00
Total Project Cost 18.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Maldives and eleven other countries border the waters of the South West Indian Ocean (SWIO) 
➢❨  the island nations of Comoros, Madagascar, Mauritius and Seychelles; and seven mainland 
countries: France, Kenya, Mozambique, Somalia, South Africa, Tanzania and Yemen. Together 
these countries are members of the South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (SWIOFC), a 
regional fisheries body. The SWIO marine fisheries are part of a larger marine ecosystem shared 
by all countries of the region. They are a regional public good, whose health and sustainability 
require regional coordination to limit the negative and enhance the positive externalities yielded 
by national activities, especially on the migratory fish species, such as tuna. Conservation and 
sustainable harvesting of the regional public goods in particular, and the shared ecosystem in 
general are central to the economy of the island countries in SWIO region.  
 
Fisheries sector accounts for a substantial portion of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the SWIO 
countries. Seafood export from these countries was approximately US$2.7 billion in 2014. Local 
industrial fisheries (mainly shrimp) and tuna processing constitute a substantial part of 
employment, income and foreign exchange earnings. Aquaculture and recreational fishing (sport 
fishing and diving) are rapidly growing industries and growing source of revenues in several of 
these countries. Fisheries, especially small-scale and subsistence fisheries play an important role 
for the livelihoods of estimated 107 million people living within 100 kilometers of the coast in the 
SWIO countries. They are often among the most vulnerable communities with high exposure to 
climate change impacts. The fisheries sector is a major contributor to nutritional health and food 
security in the SWIO region, especially for poor coastal communities with limited alternatives to 
fish for animal protein, as well as essential nutrients, vitamins, minerals and trace elements. 
 
Maldives, comprising of 26 atolls of 1,190 small coral islands of which 188 are inhabited by a 
local population of 338,434, has successfully built on its extraordinary natural assets to promote 
growth and socio-economic development. This was achieved mainly by developing a successful 
high-end tourism sector, whose sizeable rents have been redistributed to the population to address 
its development challenges. GDP per capita increased from US$268 in 1980 to US$7,681 in 2014 
(highest in South Asia), mainly driven by tourism and non-tradable tourism related activities. 
Incidence of poverty in Maldives is in line with that of an upper middle-income country, and its 
human development index is second only to Sri Lanka among the countries in South Asia. The 
share of the population living with less than US$1.25 a day was 4.9 percent in 2010, whereas the 
corresponding share using the US$2 a day poverty line was 17.02 percent in 2010. 
  
Despite this outstanding performance, the pace of poverty reduction has been below potential; and 
the level of inequality remains a major challenge. Limited job opportunities and skill-
endowments, especially for women and youth might have played an important role in limiting 
contribution of growth to poverty reduction. In particular, lack of growth in fisheries is an 
important cause of the limited impact of growth to poverty reduction, especially in the atolls away 
from MalÃ©.   
 
The World Bank➢❨ s Systematic Country Diagnostic, 2015 (SCD) provides a snapshot of the 
inherent vulnerabilities of Maldives➢❨  development program including immediate concerns 
about the fiscal, environmental and social sustainability. Due to its macro-economic vulnerability, 
given the small size, it is important to look for economic diversification away from tourism and 

heavy reliance on imports; and to promote an inclusive development of the labor market with 
particular opportunities for women and youth. There is a need to augment climate-proofing of the 
economy as climate change could cause annual economic losses of more than 12 percent of GDP 
by 2100. Emphasis on environment and natural resources management, especially preventing 
damage and pollution of the coral reefs is important to sustain and increase climate resilience of 
tourism and fisheries, the crucial components of the national economy.
Sectoral and institutional Context
An estimated 28 percent of the SWIO regional fish stocks are over-exploited or depleted 
(especially the high-value resources, such as shrimp, lobster, and sea cucumber). A further 40 
percent of stock are fully exploited (SWIOFC, 2011) from overfishing by industrial vessels and 
artisanal fishers, and widespread use of destructive equipment and techniques (such as dynamite 
or beach seines). Critical ecosystems, already weakened by land-based pollution are further 
endangered by loss of biodiversity, and destruction of coral reefs and mangroves; and 
consequently the coastal resource base is acutely threatened. As a result, it was estimated that 
SWIO coastal states incurred annual losses of US$225 million in 2008. Furthermore, a weak 
investment and business climate, coupled with limited or underperforming infrastructure and 
services, significantly constrain industrial and artisanal private sector development.  
 
As small-scale fisheries modernize, the limited potential of many coastal fisheries will require 
that fishing effort be reduced to become sustainable. This will generally translate into fewer 
vessels or jobs in harvesting operations, and require that attention be devoted to alternative 
livelihood opportunities in post-harvest value addition, aquaculture, and recreational fisheries or 
in other sectors. Reduction or elimination of destructive fishing is also a significant governance 
and social challenge.  
 
The fisheries sector in the SWIO is already largely regional, with each country➢❨ s decision 
affecting other countries➢❨  activities. In particular, large national investments, such as ports, 
fishing fleets, or processing plants, are competing against each other. Regional coordination is 
therefore needed to avoid conflicts and suboptimal sectoral investments, and to promote equitable 
distribution of wealth. Furthermore, several technical aspects of the sector are regional in nature 
(e.g., monitoring, control and surveillance, safety at sea), and their implementation, at the least, 
has to be coordinated at a regional level. The countries also face common constraints with regard 
to their fisheries sector: weak governance, weak human and institutional capacity, and a fragile 
business environment. The SWIO countries will therefore benefit from addressing these 
challenges jointly. They already use regional platforms to share their experience in implementing 
more sustainable and economically viable fisheries policies and practices, including the Indian 
Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) and SWIOFC. Greater regional cohesion will enhance the 
countries➢❨  voice in international fora as well as in negotiating fishing-related agreements, 
where decisions made have significant impacts on the fisheries sector of the SWIO countries. 
 
The SWIO countries have repeatedly called for attention to regional collaboration in the sector, 
recognizing the important contribution by the marine fisheries to regional and national goals: 
poverty reduction, food security, economic growth, balance of payments, and the value of natural 
capital. In response, major donors (the European Union, EU; France; the Global Environment 
Facility, GEF; and the World Wide Fund for Nature, WWF) and the World Bank have all 
supported regional fisheries programs in the recent past.  Consolidating and expanding past 
projects and analytical advice, the World Bank committed in-principle to finance the multiple 


South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth (SWIOFish) series of 
projects (SOP) in 2015. Three consecutive series of projects are expected: SWIOFish Phase 1 
during 2015-21 (hereafter referred as the SWIOFish SOP); SWIOFish Phase 2 during 2022-27; 
and SWIOFish Phase 3 during 2028-32. Under the first series, the First South West Indian Ocean 
Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth Project (SWIOFish1) was approved in 2015 (covering 
Comoros, Mozambique, Tanzania and the Indian Ocean Commission). The second project 
covering Madagascar and the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission) and the third project covering 
Seychelles are expected to be approved in 2017. Maldives is the fourth planned project in the 
SWIOFish, to be followed by similar country-level projects in Somalia, Mauritius and Kenya (all 
expected to be approved in FY18). 
 
At the national level, the fisheries sector is a critical contributor to the national economy and an 
important economic activity in all of Maldives➢❨  inhabited islands. In 2015, primary fisheries 
accounted directly for 1.4 percent of GDP {excluding manufacturing (3.5% of GDP); wholesale 
and retail trade (4.7%) and transport (8.7%) where fisheries has a major role} and 11 percent of 
employment. The sector generated US$140 million in export revenue in 2015 (and a high of US
$161 million 2013), which is amost all of Maldives physical exports. Although the relative 
importance of the fisheries sector has declined since the late 1970s (due to the rapid growth of 
tourism), its role in the economy remains significant, including in providing food and nutrition 
security and as a source of livelihood and employment in remote islands without a major tourism 
facility. In the atolls away from MalÃ©, 30 percent of the household heads work in fisheries.  
 
Although the country benefits from vast fishing resources spread over 923,000 square kilometer 
of exclusive economic zone (EEZ), the total fish catch has declined from 185,923 tons in 2005 to 
127,350 tons by 2015; and direct employment reduced from around 14,000 in 2001 to less than 
9,000 persons now. The bulk of fisheries catch (up to 95 percent) are skipjack and yellowfin tuna. 
The Maldivian tuna is considered a premium product due to high quality fish stocks, pristine 
water, and sustainable fishing methods. Reef fishes, which account for 5 (average) to 16 percent 
(in low ➢❨ tuna years➢❨ ) of catch are mainly used for domestic consumption and supply to 
resorts, but export is rising (especially for grouper, sea-cucumber and aquarium fish). The tuna 
fishery, especially the skipjack ➢❨ pole and line➢❨  fishery has been recognized as one of the 
most environmentally responsible fishery operations in the world (certified by the Marine 
Stewardship Council, MSC), a dimension that has helped maintain the higher than usual export 
prices in recent past. 
 
Sustainable and diversified development of the fisheries sector is part of the Government of 
Maldives➢❨  vision, which encourages economic growth based on a diversified economy and 
aims at increased job opportunities. The Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture (MoFA), with 
support from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), is preparing a Master Plan for 
Sustainable Fisheries to: (a) update and implement fisheries management plans including 
diversification; (b) strengthen the country➢❨ s monitoring, control and surveillance systems; (c) 
establish a better knowledge of the impacts of climate change on the fisheries sector; (d) reduce 
the excessive use of live bait in tuna fishery; and (e) address the heavy exploitation of export-
oriented reef fishery.  
 
The business-as-usual (BAU) scenario suggests that the fishery sector is threatened, and the 
income and jobs from the sector is at risk. The challenges of the fisheries sector are threefold. 
First, given the dependence of so many island people on fisheries, sustenance of capture fishery at 

about 120,000 tons and maintaining an export of about 60 percent of the catch are important for 
the national income and welfare of fishers and their families. Measures, such as compliance with 
the IOTC recommendations on improved surveillance and monitoring, or improved monitoring 
and generation of evidence to justify continuation of MSC certification, will be important to 
sustain exports and premium export prices. Operationalization of the Government of Maldives➢❨  
decision to focus on all value-added processing of tuna, and a quality control limit for tuna fishing 
are also required. Other challenges include inefficient use of infrastructure, inadequate 
distribution, and lack of access to finance to invest in fisheries value chains. 
 
Second, there is a need to ensure sustainability of live-bait and reef fishing. The high value tuna 
fisheries sector is dependent on live-baits and reef ecosystem. Excessive reef fishing as well as 
capture of live-baits (for tuna fisheries) is considered threats to coral reefs. Anecdotal evidence 
suggests that capture of groupers is already unsustainable. Diversification and consequent 
(partial) shift away from capture fishery is important on three accounts: (a) to minimize impacts 
on coral reefs, and to sustain the reef fish population, especially groupers; (b) ensure sustenance 
of the capture fishery to protect jobs and income of most of the households who are currently 
engaged in fisheries and associated vocations; and create alternatives for households who will not 
be able to continue in capture fishery; and, (c) to create dependable income and growth 
opportunities for communities and individuals who have gradually been excluded from the 
mainstay tuna fishing and related local processing operations, and who are involved in 
opportunistic reef fishing.  
 
The opportunities for diversification are, however, limited. Mariculture appears to be the only 
substantial opportunity, for benefiting the communities, reducing the excessive pressure from reef 
or bait fishing; and providing meaningful employment opportunities for individuals, including 
women and youth currently outside the gainfully employed workforce. Some initial mariculture 
works had been experimented so far: with pearl oysters, Maldivian clownfish, and brown marbled 
groupers. A private aquaculture farm is producing sea cucumbers, producing the larvae in 
hatcheries before growing them in lagoons. The future development of mariculture, however, is 
hindered by limited availability of fingerlings/juveniles, feed, financing and appropriate 
technology.  
 
Third, inclusive development of fisheries sector is important for substantive job creation. Towards 
this, mariculture, diversified capture of relatively deep-sea species and aquarium fishery appear to 
be ideal for Maldives. These have the potential to grow, and contribute to the reduction of 
unemployment among inhabitants of remote atolls. In implementing such a program, however, 
special attention needs to be given to the establishment of gender sensitive policy and regulatory 
framework, the establishment of benefit sharing mechanisms for the natural resources to be 
managed and, capacity building of atoll councils and small businesses. 
 
While Maldives➢❨  fisheries sector represents an undeniable engine of inclusive growth for the 
country, its sustainability and future will depend on three important and interrelated factors: (a) 
better and more transparent governance over fishing through all aspects of the value chain 
including post-harvest processing; (b) ensuring that greater value is captured across the value 
chain and that wealth generation opportunities are shared with marine resources dependent 
communities, especially youth and women; and (c) improved livelihoods and meaningful income 
opportunities for communities in the remote atolls, who should squarely be at the center of future 
sustainable mariculture development efforts. 


Fisheries in Maldives is intricately connected with the wellbeing of the regional fishery stock. In 
spite of using sustainable fishing practices, the capture of tuna has come down from 184,000 tons 
to 127,000 tons ➢❨  arguably due to the diminishing stock in the Indian Ocean as a whole. In 
recent years, Maldives was focusing on yellowfin tuna as one way of offsetting the reducing catch 
of skipjack tuna. In spite of practicing sustainable fishing in the Maldivian waters, the yellowfin 
tuna population in the Indian Ocean Region has shrunk, and the IOTC has now specified reduced 
quota for yellowfin catch. It is evident that these regional level issues have had implication at the 
national level. The tuna stock in the Indian Ocean is somewhat at risk, and it is expected that tuna 
catch will reduce further in the coming years.  
 
The best option for Maldives is to work with other countries to ensure sustainable practices over 
all of the Indian Ocean Region. At the same time, Maldives needs to (a) augment its own systems, 
procedures, compliance mechanisms, and skills to retain the ➢❨ environmentally sustainable➢❨  
branding to capture premium price in international markets, and (b) offer to share the knowledge 
of its own systems, procedures, compliance mechanisms, and the ➢❨ environmentally 
sustainable➢❨  fishing technology to the other countries. By demonstrating higher capture of 
value and premium price, Maldives can demonstrate to the other countries that conservation 
indeed pays.  
 
Nevertheless, Maldives will need to grow, and this need threatens other parts of the ecosystem 
even if tuna fishing is at the current sustainable level. Maldives cannot afford to espouse the cause 
of conservation of tuna fishery (in its own waters and in the region) and at the same t ime destroy/
diminish reef fishery. Therefore, diversification into mariculture and consequent (partial) shift 
away from capture fishery (in particular for new entrants) is important on two accounts: (a) to 
minimize impacts on coral reefs, and to sustain the reef fish population, especially groupers; (b) to 
create dependable income and growth opportunities for communities and future generations, 
especially women who had been gradually excluded from the mainstay tuna fishing and related 
local processing operations, and youth who are involved in opportunistic reef fishing. The agenda 
of conservation of reef and waters, reef fishery, and development of mariculture as the best 
diversification option, therefore are closely linked to the regional conservation agenda.  
 
As discussed above, a Regional IDA investment in Maldives is a crucial part of the SWIOFish 
SOP. SWIOFish1 and SWIOFish2 mention specific investment in Maldives. Maldives is currently 
co-chairing (and will take over as chair in 2017) the SWIOFC, and is participating in the 
SWIOFish Bureau meetings, the Scientific Committee Meetings, meetings of the Working Group 
on Fisheries Data and Statistics, meetings of the Working Party on Cooperation and Coordination 
in Tuna Fisheries; and the overall SWIOFC meetings including annual SWIOFC Sessions ➢❨  all 
supported by SWIOFish1. Maldives also benefits from SWIOFish1 regional support to develop a 
National Observer Program, in line with the IOTC➢❨ s recommendations, to eventually be able to 
participate in the SWIOFC Countries➢❨  Regional Observers Program. Under SWIOFish2, 
Maldives will benefit from training by IOTC Secretariat➢❨ s technical teams to better implement 
Maldives➢❨  international fisheries obligations under the IOTC, such as the Port States➢❨  
Measures to combat Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated fishing. 
 
In essence, an investment in sustainable fisheries resources development in Maldives will be 
beneficial to the countries in South-West Indian Ocean region, due to (i) economies of scale from 

shared infrastructure, technologies, and knowledge; (ii) positive externalities yielded by national 
activities to avoid the ➢❨ tragedy of the commons➢❨  scenario; (iii) addressing common 
constraints jointly through regional platforms and workshops; (iv) greater regional cohesion in the 
international fora as well as in negotiations of fishing-related agreements where decisions need to 
be collective and impacts are shared; and, (v) upgraded value-chain linkages by collectively 
helping their fisheries sector integrate into more competitive value chain.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Development Objective(s)
To improve management of fisheries at regional and national levels including support to establish 
mariculture in targeted atolls in the Maldives.

Key Results 
The project seeks to achieve the following key results: 
(a) Compliance rate of SWIO countries with IOTC resolutions (Regional-level Indicator; 
same as SWIOFish2 indicator)  
(b) Vessels complying with IOTC and European Union requirements on monitoring and 
reporting (Regional-level Indicator) 
(c) Value of production from mariculture 
(d) Direct project beneficiaries (of which share of female beneficiaries) 
(e) Share of target beneficiaries with rating ➢❨ satisfied➢❨  or above on project 
interventions.

D.  Project Description

The proposed project is the fourth in the SWIOFish SOP. As articulated in the SOP description, a 
central thrust of the SOP is that while the challenges are regional in nature, addressing them 
requires action at the national level, which will yield regional benefits, enhance ownership and 
efficiency, and strengthen national institutions to help enhance the overall health of fisheries in 
the region. The project components are directly linked to the wellbeing of the regional fishery 
stock. Other than ➢❨ Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation➢❨ , the project will 
consist of two components ➢❨  one will focus on improving the currently inadequately managed 
capture fishery, and the other one will support diversifying the fisheries economy so that 
sufficient jobs and income are created outside capture fishery to reduce stress on the regionally 
shared fish stock. Both components will build improved resilience in Maldives.  
 
Component A: Augmentation of Institutional Capacity for Marine Fisheries Management. This 
component seeks to enhance the Government➢❨ s capacity to implement a more effective 
monitoring of fisheries sector and internal control system of key marine fisheries value chains, 
and will focus on delivery of the Indian Ocean Regional agenda (as well as the intended 
adaptation agenda) of improving the overall fisheries management, marine zoning for long-term 
benefits, and a longer-term plan to establish and operationalize in-country skill and capacity 
building activities, essential for sustenance and growth of the fishery sector in Maldives. The four 
sub-components include: (A1) Development of key fisheries management and planning 
instruments including updating fisheries policy and legislative framework, zoning covering the 
entire Maldivian EEZ, and support to grouper fish management, coral reef and reef fishery 
management plans which are essential for regional conservation and improved compliance with 

IOTC recommended conservation and management measures; (A2) Development and 
implementation of fisheries management activities to ensure  compliance with IOTC and EU 
requirements, including expanded MCS, vessel registration and monitoring systems, electronic 
observer systems and augmentation of related reporting systems for commercial marine fisheries; 
collaboration with the SWIO Sub-Regional Fisheries Monitoring Centers; and, support and 
facilitation to regional agencies and international actors on the common agenda of conservation 
and management measures; (A3) Support to long-term program for fisheries management 
including sampling programs for tuna and recreational fish species, stock assessments and 
conservation zone surveys which will contribute to regional assessments and subsequent actions; 
and preparation of protocols disease surveillance, and quality control of brood stocks and fish 
feed; (A4) Fisheries sector capacity building including short and medium-term training, 
development of curriculum and teaching aids, collaboration with National Geographic 
Information System (GIS), and development and operation of a fisheries management information 
system ➢❨  all focusing on strengthening local and national skills that will contribute to national 
and SWIO Region agenda related to fishery management and consequent diversification into 
mariculture.  
 
Component B: Support to Mariculture and Diversification of Fisheries. Potential economic 
growth from diversification of capture fishery and from mariculture are pre-requisites for 
sustenance of the capture fishery resources in the Maldivian EEZ. However, mariculture is 
nascent in Maldives; and to be able to develop this sector, research, demonstration and provision 
of extension services will play key roles in addition to the three primary inputs: seeds, feed and 
access to finance. The four sub-components, therefore, include:  (B1) Development and 
demonstration of mariculture production and technology package, including completion and 
operationalization of, and preparation of medium-term operations plans and service standards for 
the Maniyafushi research and development facility (MRDF) as a center of excellence for the 
entire SWIO region; development and demonstration of technology packages for mariculture 
species; and market studies in support of mariculture choices; (B2) Promotion of mariculture out-
grower schemes and seafood growth clusters, including assessment of carrying capacity and 
supporting community custodianship of the coral reef resources, start-up investments including 
training, advisory support and compliance monitoring in out-grower farms, technical support to 
small enterprises for establishing out-grower contractual arrangements between small producers 
and larger private sector aggregators, and studies to help develop gender actions in mariculture; 
(B3) Supporting design, construction and operation of a multi-species hatchery including breeder 
stock development programs and professional training plans; and, (B4) Scoping of long-term 
marine fisheries diversification studies including planning and scoping of studies related to 
technology packages and conservation plans for new marine species to be explored in future.  
 
 
Component C: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2.15 million).  This 
component would provide equipment, technical assistance, training, and incremental operating 
cost to strengthen the overall administrative capacity and capability of the Ministry of Fisheries 
and Agriculture and its Project Management Unit (PMU) to manage, implement, and monitor and 
evaluate project activities. Specifically, support will include staffing and operation of the PMU; 
establishment of adequate financial management and procurement management systems; 
implementation of the communication plan and grievance redress activities; monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) and third party audits; preparation and implementation of specific 
environmental impact assessments as per the national laws; coordination with other ministries 

such as the Ministry of Environment and Energy and the private sector; special evaluation studies; 
and sharing of monitoring protocols, evaluation studies and specific experience of implementation 
of various aspects of fisheries management activities that are of interest with SWIO Region 
countries.

Component Name
Augmentation of Institutional Capacity for Marine Fisheries Management
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Support to Mariculture and Diversification of Fisheries
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

Maldives is an island nation in the Indian Ocean oriented north-south off India's Lakshadweep 
Islands. The Maldives consists of 1,192 coral islands grouped in a double chain of 26 atolls. The 
country➢❨ s atolls encompass a territory spread over roughly 90,000 square km, making it one of 
the world's most geographically dispersed countries.  Of the 1,192 islands, 188 are inhabited by 
the country➢❨ s population, with an average of 5-10 islands in each atoll being inhabited islands 
that have infrastructure such as housing, roads and other facilities built in. The country➢❨ s total 
land area is estimated to approximately 300 square km, with islands varying in size from 0.5 to 
5.0 square km. A significant number of uninhabited islands in each atoll have also been converted 
to resorts and tourism facilities as well as house infrastructure such as industrial facilities and 
airports. 
 
The atolls are composed of live coral reefs and sand bars, situated atop a submerged ridge 960km 
long that rises abruptly from the depths of the Indian Ocean. Maldives is noted as the country 
placed at the lowest elevation in the world, with maximum and average natural ground levels of 
only 2.4 m and 1.5 m above sea level, respectively. More than 80 per cent of the country's land is 
composed of coral islands which rise less than one meter above sea level. The islands consist of 
coral, sea grass, seaweed, mangrove and sand dune ecosystems which are of great ecological and 
socio-economic significance. Maldives is home to a number ecologically sensitive marine habitats 
in shallow and intertidal zones which have been designated as protected areas by the Ministry of 
Environment and Energy (MEE) and these regions and any activities in their vicinity are 
stringently monitored and managed. 
 
Climatic conditions in the Maldives belong to the tropical-monsoon category with temperatures 
ranging between 24Â°C and 33Â°C throughout the year. Climatic conditions in the Maldives is 


predominantly affected by the large landmass of South Asia situated to the north. The presence of 
this landmass causes differential heating of land and water. These factors set off a rush of 
moisture-rich air from the Indian Ocean over South Asia, resulting in the southwest monsoon. 
Two seasons dominate Maldives' weather: the dry season associated with the winter northeastern 
monsoon and the rainy season which brings strong winds and storms. The shift from the dry 
northeast monsoon to the moist southwest monsoon occurs during April and May and the 
southwest monsoon Maldives in the beginning of June and lasts until the end of August. Annual 
rainfall averages 254cm in the north and 381cm in the south, with the southern region 
experiencing more rain.  
 
The project focuses on the whole nation. The island of Maniyafushi where the project will finance 
the augmentation of the infrastructure of the Maniyafushi Research Centre, is an uninhabited 
island and the airport island located in South MalÃ© Atoll, where the physical infrastructure has 
already been set up. The establishment and subsequent operation of mariculture out grower farms 
(in the remote northern atolls, selected specifically to avoid any potential impacts corals and water 
quality).

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (GEN06)

Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (GSU06)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture (MoFA) has the mandate, jurisdiction and experience in 
managing fisheries, and will lead project implementation. The MoFA has implemented or 
participated in implementation of Bank-financed projects several years ago, not in the recent past. 
While MoFA has a large mandate, it has limited staff. A dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU) 
has therefore been established within MoFA, with adequate number of technical staff, including 
expert staff on mariculture development, extension, research, and market studies; environmental and 
social management; financial management, procurement, communication, monitoring and evaluation. 
 
The responsibilities of MoFA including the Steering Committee include providing national policy 
and implementation framework; approval of the project and securing the required budget from the 
Ministry of Finance and Treasury (MoFT); approval of the project➢❨ s overall annual action plans 
and annual budgets; and overall implementation oversight. MoFA will ensure that most of the project 
activities are duly executed by its regular divisions and field offices. MoFA has also prepared a 
Project Implementation Plan (PIP), which describes the project activities and their estimated costs, 
allocation of implementation responsibilities, procurement and financial management arrangements 
and plans, to guide implementation. 
 
The PMU mimics the organizational structure of the MoFA. This is important because: (a) the actual 
execution of project activities will take place using the MoFA divisions and their field offices, and a 
clear coordination between the PMU and the relevant MoFA division is needed, as PMU staff will be 
deputed in those divisions and field offices; (b) an appropriate part of the additional expertise and 
staff recruited under the PMU will be absorbed in the respective MoFA divisions at closure of the 
project for long-term improvement of institutional capacity; (c) even if most of the staff will be 

recruited from market (including expatriate consultants given the shortage of qualified fisheries 
experts in Maldives), the organizational structure of the PMU will allow MoFA to depute permanent 
staff of regular divisions to the PMU in a manner that staff can make career progressions and based 
on performance can return to their parent divisions when the deputation is over.  
 
The PMU will be responsible for project implementation, facilitating statutory clearances, including 
environmental permits; procurement of works, goods and services; and implementation of specific 
capacity building activities as per the PIP. PMU staff working on procurement, financial 
management, knowledge management, monitoring and evaluation will be located in MalÃ© while all 
other PMU functions, including fisheries management, fisheries compliance, marine research, and 
mariculture will be co-located with the MoFA divisions at MalÃ© or at the field (including at the 
offices of Island Councils) and/or the offices of MRC, MRDF, or the site of the multi-species 
hatchery. The PMU, through its marine research, fisheries management, and compliance cells, will 
support MoFA for its retained role in coordinating with IOC, IOTC, SWIO Region countries; and 
through its central cell, will provide research and logistics support to MoFA in its incoming role of 
chairing the SWIOFC. 
 
The PMU will collaborate with and seek support and partnerships with a range of other agencies to 
strengthen the capacity of the main implementing actors. These will include international knowledge 
centers, including the World Aquaculture Alliance; academic and research institutes including the 
Maldives National University; private sector business houses and industries including the Maldives 
National Chamber of Commerce and Industry; civil society groups, atoll level community 
organizations and other government departments responsible for development and protection of 
marine resources (such as the Ministry of Environment and Energy).

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The project was categorized as an Environmental Category B 
project, due to the potential, unless avoided, of direct and 
indirect impacts flowing from physical interventions such as 
(a) establishment of a multi-species hatchery; (b) augmentation 
of the infrastructure of the Maniyafushi Research and 
Development Facility (MRDF); and (c) establishment and 
operation of out grower farms for mariculture in different 
atolls. To avoid, mitigate and/or manage such potential 
environmental impacts, an Environmental and Social 
management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared, which 
provides detailed analysis of the scale of due diligence 
required (such as specific guidance site selection, preparation 
of environmental assessments, environmental management 
plans, etc.) as may be required, or generic but appropriate 
avoidance and environmental mitigation measures in the 
project. Specific standalone environmental impact assessments 
(and subsequent permits from the Ministry of Environment and 
Energy) will also be needed for the multi-species hatchery; 
augmentation of the infrastructure of the MRDF; and out 
grower farms for mariculture. The ESMF provides budgets to 


prepare such environmental impact assessments (which contain 
the respective environmental management plans). A standalone 
EA (including the relevant environmental management plan) 
has already been prepared for the quality assurance, quarantine 
and disease control research laboratory of the MRDF (which a 
front-runner intervention) and has been annexed to the ESMF 
and disclosed accordingly.

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

Yes This policy was triggered as all of the islands in Maldives are 
surrounded by coral reefs, with some reefs, island and waters 
around being legally protected; and it is important to avoid any 
significant impacts on these natural resources. As per the 
criteria included in the ESMF, the project design avoids any 
activity in and around of the protected marine or terrestrial 
areas. The ESMF has in place the due diligence measures to 
avoid or reduce the impacts on coral reefs, marine ecosystems 
and associated fauna and flora during the establishment and 
subsequent operation of mariculture out grower farms (in the 
remote atolls, selected specifically to avoid impacts on corals 
and water quality). The project will not involve the 
introduction of any non-native/naturalized species for the 
purpose of mariculture.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No There are no areas classified as forests in Maldives. Any 
potential impacts on island or sea vegetation (such as sea grass, 
seaweed) are covered through OP/BP 4.01.

Pest Management OP 
4.09

No This policy is not triggered as the project will not finance the 
purchase, use or promotion of any pesticides, herbicides or 
similar other synthetic chemicals.

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No No project-supported activities are expected in the vicinity of 
or will affect physical cultural resources, as defined by OP/
BP4.11. All sites of physical cultural resources value in the 
Maldives are already designated and mandated as protected 
areas where no physical interventions can take place. Measures 
for safeguard chance finds have been included as part of 
mitigation measures defined in the ESMF.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

No This policy is not triggered as there are no identifiable 
indigenous communities in the project locations (islands and 
atolls).

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

No No involuntary resettlement from land, livelihood or access to 
livelihood is expected in the project. Project activities such as 
capacity-building, research, MRDF, quality control and disease 
surveillance, establishment of household-level mariculture out-
grower farms do not give rise to any involuntary resettlement 
from land, livelihood or access to natural resources. However, 
there remains a possibility of indirect impacts that could arise 
if the marine zoning, zoning plans, and conservation plans for 
reef fishes financed by the project proposes restrictions on 


non-sustainable practices, establishment of new conservation 
areas if any, or increased level of enforcement of management 
regulations for existing conservation areas. In all such cases 
the short-term economic and/or livelihood interests of local 
communities currently engaged in activities that rapidly 
deplete resources including fish stock could be impacted. 
Although the OP4.12 explicitly provides exemption to actions 
such as natural resources management, or preparation of 
fisheries management plans, the ESMF contains a framework 
compliant with the principles of OP4.12, to specify that any 
activity which has the chance of adverse impact on citizens and 
communities, or any chance of restricting traditional access to 
natural resources will be excluded from the project (throughout 
during implementation), and the process of preparation of 
zoning and other fisheries sector conservation plans will 
employ participation and citizen engagement. The policies and 
priorities that drives preparation of any zoning plans and 
regulations, conservation plans and/or strategies in Maldives 
are to protect the rights, claims and access of Maldivian 
citizens to the territorial waters of Maldives. These principles 
are also be strictly adhered to by the project, and all such 
zoning plans and conservation regulations will require 
approval of the Atoll Councils. Therefore, it is not conceivable 
that any restriction of access to traditionally used natural 
resources will be restricted by zoning plans, regulations, 
conservation plans and enforcement supported by the project. 
Further, while the exact locations and potential impacts of all 
activities, especially the mariculture grow-out facilities, are not 
yet known, the ESMF and the site specific social assessments 
will guide these sets of activities.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

No This policy is not triggered as there will be no activities that 
invest on dams or water retention structures.

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

No This policy is not triggered as there will be no activities in 
international waterways or activities that will have impacts on 
international waterways.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The policy is not applicable because there are no disputed 
areas in Maldives.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
While the project is classified as environmental category B, the project is expected to bring 
positive environmental benefits to the project areas as the entire design of the project is based on 
the need to conserve the marine resources, avoid and stop unsustainable capture and yields, 


comply with the best regional and international standards, and diversify into mariculture as an 
alternative to threatened reef fisheries. The project will not lead to potential large scale significant 
and/or irreversible impact as the impacts will be largely localized to project sites and can be 
managed via stringent due diligence and adherence to national and international sectoral standards. 
Specific standalone environmental impact assessments and subsequent permits from the Ministry 
of Environment will be needed for the (i) multi-species hatchery; (ii) augmentation of the 
infrastructure of the Maniyafushi Research Centre; and (iii) out grower farms for mariculture and 
it is through these assessments that site specific impacts will be identified. 
 
The project will support the establishment of infrastructure such as training and research centers 
and laboratories as well as infrastructure to conduct mariculture activities such as fish cadges and/
or pens. These could, unless carefully managed and mitigated, lead to localized environmental 
impacts typical to civil works, such as the generation of construction wastes, generation of dust, 
noise, etc., and occupational and safety impacts that will be managed accordingly. The civil works 
contracts may involve the use of expatriate/ migrant/ non-local labor but no influx related issues 
are expected - two out of the three islands involved are uninhabited (therefore, there is no host 
community), and the work at the Airport Island/ Hulumale will be expansion of an existing small 
building to create the required laboratory facility. 
 
The project will finance start-up investments into household-level aquaculture/mariculture 
production, for example, cage cultivation of native/naturalized fish species. Operations of the 
multi species hatchery, and the MRDF could also pose potential operational impacts. During 
mariculture operations, typical environmental impacts include eutrophication from feeds and 
effluents, release of antifouling chemicals and antibiotics, and impacts introduction of alien 
invasive species. The project, in conformity with the Maldivian national environmental regulations 
will support mariculture of native/naturalized species. Careful site selection of grow-out 
mariculture farms will avoid eutrophication, pollutant loading on undersea surfaces, and use or 
accumulation of synthetic pollutants. Other impacts include scenarios of fish escaping from farms 
may compete with wild stocks, or transfer of parasites and diseases, or genetic interaction between 
escaped farmed fish and wild fish stocks. However such site-specific impacts will be regulated, 
controlled and managed, especially through specific EA/EMP that will be undertaken, and 
incorporating stringent measures for mitigating and managing operational impacts in the design 
and operation of the grow-out mariculture farms. Mariculture is not entirely new to the Maldives; 
in the last decade two projects have been initiated in the islands, for which EAs were undertaken, 
and the recommended mitigation and management measures were undertaken. Similar EAs will be 
prepared for the grow-out mariculture farms, which will also comply with the requirements under 
Maldives➢❨  own regulatory framework.  
 
While the project does not envisage any adverse social impacts, some of the Component 1 
activities may lead to possible restrictions in access and increased cost to some fishers. Sub-
Components A1 and A3 in particular seek to improve the regulatory and management practices of 
the fishing industry but, in doing so, may restrict access to fisheries resources and could reduce 
income for some fishers. However, given that any fishery management plan will, by its 
characteristic intent, will try to curb overexploitation of fish stock without exception, the 
management plans (sub-components A1 and A3) will need to adopt a transparent and participatory 
process of agreement on the actions  to be included in the management plans. 
 
Overall, there is no potential large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts likely from the 
project.


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
The social and environmental impacts of the proposed project is deemed to be positive and 
sustainable in the long term. The project is also expected to improve the overall socio-economic 
status of the communities, including youth and women, as a result of the potential opportunities 
via employment creation and livelihood activities.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
No alternatives have been considered, predominantly as the fisheries sector, after tourism, is the 
main source of livelihood and income generation in the Maldives and the proposed project 
activities will provide the most environmentally sound management options of the sector in 
comparison to current practices.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in lieu of an overall project-
specific Environmental Assessment (EA) and a Social Assessment (SA) has been prepared as 
details of all specific sites and design of the project➢❨ s physical interventions are not known. A 
standalone EA has already been prepared for the quality assurance, quarantine and disease control 
research laboratory, which is a front runner intervention and is annexed to the ESMF and disclosed 
accordingly.  The ESMF outlines detailed guidelines of measures for environmental and social risk 
mitigation and institutional arrangements for conducting environmental and social assessment, 
instruction to the preparation of Environmental and Social Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental 
and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), and other such measures as well as implementation and 
monitoring. 
 
All interventions will be subject to an environmental and social screening with the objective to: (a) 
determine the anticipated environmental and social impacts, risks and opportunities of sub-project; 
and (ii) determine if the anticipated impacts and public concerns warrant further analysis, and if so 
to recommend the appropriate type and extent of Environmental and Social Assessments needed as 
per the criteria set in the ESMF. The ESMF also provides the screening and selection criteria for 
household-level mariculture out-grower farms. 
 
The ESMF takes the applicable safeguard policies into account as well as the national 
environmental requirements and World Bank environmental Health and Safety Guidelines, which 
serves as a guide to the level of environmental and social analysis and mitigation required for all 
interventions supported by the project that will have any potential to cause negative environmental 
and social impacts; and thereby ensure compliance with the World Bank➢❨ s safeguard policies 
and the relevant national regulations during implementation.  
 
The implementing agency of the project, the MoFA, has not led implementation of any World 
Bank-financed project the recent years. Capacity within MoFA to manage environmental and 
social risks within a project setting is be limited. Therefore, in the Project Management Unit 
(PMU) set up for implementation of this project, staffing includes an Environmental and Social 
Officer with relevant technical and sectoral expertise to take up the role of environmental and 
social coordinator.  S/he will report to the Project Director and will work closely with the assigned 
PMU team, the Ministry of Environment and Energy, the Island Councils, the Environmental 
Protection Agency, and will be responsible for ensuring the overall implementation of the ESMF. 


S/he will liaise with other agencies, contractors and consultants at the activity levels to implement 
the required mitigation and management measures. The E&S Coordinator will be responsible for 
monitoring and evaluation of implementation of the environmental and social management plans, 
and will prepare regular reports on compliance and status of performance indicators. The Island 
Councils will be the first level of contact for any grievance/feedback for the community, and the 
E&S Coordinator will work closely with the Island Councils to redress any grievance. The E&S 
Coordinator will lead to orient PMU and MoFA staff, consultants and contractors on the ESMF 
and on operationalization of the ESMF for each of the project activities. 
 
The project will provide training in environmental and social management to improve institutional 
capacity. The cost for monitoring and supervising the implementation of environmental and social 
project regulations have been integrated into the overall project investment cost. In addition, the 
project will also provide capacity building to potential operators of out grower farms on 
maintaining a good mariculture environment, and mitigating and managing potential 
environmental impacts during the operation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders included fisherpersons, fishing vessel-owners, fisherpersons➢❨  
associations, exporters and transporters involved in export of capture tuna and reef fishes, and 
relevant government officials. The MoFA organized elaborate discussions and consultations with 
these key stakeholder groups during November 2015 ➢❨  September 2016. The ESMF has been 
developed based on suggestions and recommendations from these key stakeholder groups. The 
project activities do not lead to adverse social or involuntary resettlement impacts, and 
consequently, there is no adversely affected person. The ESMF document was disclosed prior to 
appraisal of the project. Specific consultations at national, atoll and island levels will continue 
during implementation of the project, including during preparation of activity-specific 
environmental and social assessments.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 17-Jan-2017

Date of submission to InfoShop 18-Jan-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Maldives 17-Jan-2017
Comments: The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is available in the 

website of the Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture (http://www.fishagri.gov.mv/
images/download/MSFDP/msfd-esmf-january-17-2017.pdf).

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Samoa Agriculture & Fisheries Productivity and Marketing Project (SAFPROM) (P165873) 

 
 

  
Feb 18, 2018 Page 1 of 13  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC24085 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Samoa P165873  Samoa Agriculture & 
Fisheries Productivity 
and Marketing Project 
(SAFPROM) (P165873) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Sep 03, 2018 Dec 10, 2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture & 
Fisheriers 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of targeted beneficiaries in selected crops and livestock value-chains 
and to improve management of targeted fisheries. 

 
 Financing (in USD Million) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 21.00 

Total Financing 21.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 21.00 

     World Bank Lending 21.00 
   

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 



INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT 

 
A. Country Context 
The Independent State of Samoa (Samoa) is a small remote Pacific Island Country (PIC) with a population of 
approximately 197,000 people1. Samoa consists of two large islands (Upolu and Savai’i), and several smaller islands, it 
has a total land area of approximately 2,830 km2 and an exclusive economic zone of 131,000km2. Samoa is a stable 
democracy with steady growth supported by the tourism and agriculture sectors.  

 
Like many PIC’s, Samoa faces unique challenges to its economic growth, due to its small size, remoteness, high 
exposure to shocks and environmental fragility. Economic growth has picked up in recent years, and in FY2016 real GDP 
expanded by around 7 percent, much faster than originally forecast and a significant acceleration from growth of 
between 1 and 2 percent in the previous two years. Growth in FY16 was driven by tourism arrivals, lower fuel prices, 
and new fish processing facilities, as well as two major sporting events. Over the medium term, real GDP is expected to 
increase at an annual rate of around 2 percent2. However, it’s important to note that frequent natural disasters can 
distort this picture. Samoa was hit by Tropical Cyclone Evan in late 2012 and, according to the Damage and Loss 
Assessment3 caused an estimated US$210 million (30% of annual GDP) in damages and losses, including a loss of 49 
percent in crop and livestock GDP, and 5 percent in fisheries GDP. While Samoa has largely recovered from the effects 
of TC Evan, Category 5 Cyclones have been a 1 in 10-year event for Samoa.  
 
Samoa’s growth is also constrained by the high instances of obesity and noncommunicable diseases. Fifty-four percent 
of Samoa’s population is obese and 25 percent of people smoke and it is predicted that the economic burden of NCDs 
will reach as high as 8.5 percent of GDP by 20404. 
 
Samoa faces persistent challenges in securing prosperity for all and the incidence of hardship remains high. While 
extreme poverty is low, at 0.6 percent, basic needs poverty or ‘hardship’, is at 26.9 percent. Eighty-one percent of 
Samoa’s population live in rural areas and most households are engaged in some form of agricultural activity. While 
strong traditional family and community based safety nets are still effective in preventing extreme hardship, these 
traditional networks cannot manage local or country-wide shocks that affect most of their members, such as natural 
disasters. 

 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
Sectoral context: In Samoa, and across the Pacific, agriculture and coastal fisheries play an important role in meeting 
subsistence needs. The most commonly produced crops are taro, banana and yam, and many households have small-
scale subsistence livestock production. In February 2017, ‘food and live animal’ imports were the top category of 
imports, accounting for 27.5 percent of total imports5, and in 2015, approximately 67 percent of all retail beef and 95 
percent of chicken meat was imported. Low cost and low quality food imports often crowd out domestic production 
and contribute (together with irrelevant food behaviors) significantly to the non-communicable disease crisis 
experienced in the region. On the other hand, fresh fish, particularly tuna, still constitutes one of the largest export 
commodities, accounting for 39 percent of exports in 20166, however in terms of contribution to GDP, fishing 
accounted for only 3.2 percent of nominal GDP in the July to September 2017 quarter. 

 
1 Samoa Bureau of Statistics.  
2 Samoa First Resilience DPO, The World Bank (2017) 
3 “Samoa Post-Disaster Needs Assessment, Cyclone Evan 2012”, Government of Samoa, March 2013.  
4 Pacific Possible, The World Bank (2017) 
5 Samoa Bureau of Statistics (http://www.sbs.gov.ws/index.php/new-document-library?view=download&fileId=1990) 
6 Central Bank of Samoa 


According to the 2015 Samoa Agriculture Survey, 97 percent of households grow some crops or raise some livestock. 
For most of these households, agriculture is a secondary activity, growing crops for subsistence purposes only. Despite 
this, agriculture in Samoa is becoming more market-oriented; between 2009 and 2015, there was a 5.2 percent 
increase in agriculture households selling ‘some produce’ and a 4.4 percent increase in major crop households 
producing mainly for sale7.  
 
Based on the same survey, 21 percent of all households are engaged in fisheries activities, with the highest rate (37 
percent) in Savaii. Home consumption is the main purpose, representing 70 percent of those households in 2015. As a 
result of destructive fishing practices, near shore fish and fishery products had a steep decline in the early 1990’s, 
however conservation and management plans were put in place and anecdotal evidence suggests the sector is 
gradually recovering.  
 
Samoa’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is the smallest in the Pacific region and tuna longline fishery, particularly 
albacore, is the main offshore fishery. While tuna used to be the country’s largest export earner, recent years have 
seen a decline in the overall tuna catches, with a more than 50 percent reduction between 2009 and 2013.  
Transshipment operations by Taiwanese longliners began in Apia, Samoa in 2010. As of April 2012, there had been 34 
such operations, with 6 occurring in 2012.  Numerous smaller domestic longliners also transship in Samoa with the 
target market being the cannery in neighboring American Samoa. In 2014 Samoa signed onto the Tokelau Arrangement, 
a joint approach to managing the South Pacific Longline Fishery. 
 
Currently only 1 percent of Samoan’s are formally employed in the agriculture and fisheries sector, one third of these 
are women8. While female labor force participation overall increased between 2011 and 2015, paid farm work for 
women is still low, at its lowest comprising only 12 percent in Savai’i9. However, in line with the rest of Samoa, women 
engaged in farm work tend to have higher levels of education than men; in 2015 the percentage of women in farm 
households with tertiary qualifications was double that of men. It is also more likely that an educated farm labor force 
will be open to modern farming techniques and tools10. 

 
Agriculture in Samoa is very vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change. Climate change is predicted to 
manifest itself in more frequent and extreme rainfall events, longer dryer spells and drought events, rising sea levels, 
extreme winds, and high air and water temperatures. According the World Bank’s Climate and Disaster Risk Screening 
Tool, this project is likely to face (i) a high level of exposure to climate and disaster hazards, (ii) high impact on physical 
infrastructure and assets as a result of those hazards and (iii) a high level of risk to the outcomes and service delivery of 
the project. More on the results of the Climate and Disaster Risk Screening tool can be found under the ‘Overall Risk’ 
section. 
 
The limited access to: (i) extension and veterinary services for farmers, (ii) markets, and (iii) financing services 
constitute the key bottlenecks to unlocking the agriculture potential in Samoa. Currently only one state Veterinarian 
services the entire country’s livestock needs and there is limited knowledge and available training for farmers wanting 
to try new or innovative practices. New regulations around food labelling and health and safety standards coming into 

 
7 A major crop household is defined as an agricultural household with more than 625 square yards of land under garden crops; or more than 20 
coconut trees; or more than 20 banana plants; or more than 20 other tree crops. 

effect will also create additional requirements for market access. However, if well accompanied, smallholders farmers 
could also benefit substantially from these. 

 
Institutional context: The Government of Samoa’s Agriculture Sector Plan 2016-2020 provides the framework to guide 
coherent programs and actions from all key stakeholders to achieve the goal of increased food, nutrition and income 
security in Samoa. Under this plan, additional attention is being paid to build the institutional capacity of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) to manage the sector-wide program. A lack of data was identified as a challenge to 
planning and monitoring in the agriculture sector, so the MAF is working closely with the Samoa Bureau of Statistics to 
strengthen data collection systems, analysis and reporting. 
 
A key outcome in the Plan is to increase the supply and consumption of competitively priced, domestically produced 
food. Fish and Taro are the top two agriculture exports (accounting for 38 and 9 percent of exports respectively in July-
September 2017 quarter). Chicken legs, followed by sugar and mutton were the biggest food imports in 2017 – poultry 
and sheep production therefore present substantial potential for import substitution. Building on the achievements of 
SACEP, the Plan looks to extend and scale up adoption of new technologies, strengthen farm business management 
skills and producer linkages to sustainable and profitable markets. Improving access to productive resources, financial 
services and business skills particularly for women is also key, noting that global experience has shown where women 
have increased access to income generating opportunities and social decision-making empowerment at community 
level, household nutrition improves. 

 
C. Relationship to CPF 
The Regional Partnership Framework (RPF) for FY17 to FY21, which was approved in February 2017, covers nine small 
Pacific Island countries (PIC9), including Samoa. The RPF identifies four areas of focus: (i) fully exploiting the available 
economic opportunities; (ii) enhancing access to employment opportunities; (iii) protecting incomes and livelihoods; 
and (iv) strengthening the enablers of growth and opportunities (macro-economic management, infrastructure and 
addressing knowledge gaps). Alongside this, the Pacific Eight Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD), found very 
important solution areas for Samoa include increasing incomes from agriculture and coastal fishing, preventing 
noncommunicable diseases and strengthening disaster risk preparedness.  
 
The proposed Samoa Agriculture and Fisheries Productivity and Marketing Project (SAFPROM) generally supports both 
the RPF focus areas and the Samoa-specific solution areas in the SCD. More commercially-viable farming practices and 
better access to markets will make use of economic opportunities available to most Samoans, and increase incomes for 
those involved; providing more climate-resilient crops, education and farming infrastructure will protect incomes and 
livelihoods in the face of natural disasters and a changing climate, and; promoting locally produced food will support a 
healthy diet and less dependence on food imports.  
 
The FY2017 to FY2020 Strategy for the Development of Samoa highlights increased agricultural production as a priority 
area for Samoa, which the Samoa Agriculture and Marketing Project will also contribute to. The project is also aligned 
to the Government of Samoa’s Agriculture Sector Plan 2016-2020, aimed at increasing the food, nutrition and income 
security in Samoa. 
 
The SAFPROM will also allow Samoa to join the Pacific Islands Regional Oceanoscape Program (PROP). The PROP 
Program was developed as a Series of Projects (SOP) to be implemented in three phases, each six years’ in duration. 
Phase 1 began in 2014 and is being implemented with four countries (Federated States of Micronesia, Republic of 
Marshall Islands, Solomon Islands, Tuvalu) and one regional institution, the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency 
(FFA). The Phase I country projects all share the same Regional Program PDO and Results Framework. They also reflect 

the same component design drawing on a pre-set menu of investment activities. By allowing Samoa to join the PROP, 
this project meets key criteria for utilizing the regional International Development Association (IDA) funds. The program 
(i) involves three or more countries; (ii) has benefits, economic, social and environmental, that spill over country 
boundaries (tuna / pelagic fishes’ stocks and fisheries management); (iii) requires coordination with regional bodies 
(SPC and FFA) and with other countries in the region; and (iv) provides a platform for a high level of policy 
harmonization among countries. 
 
As the PROP Program expands into Phase II with Tonga and Samoa operations, it has been decided that the regional 
project with FFA will not incorporate these new countries in Phases II and III, as it was found that the regional 
implementation approach is not the optimal model with which to secure regional support and coordination of the 
national projects.  Rather, a soft technical assistance model bilaterally to each of the four main regional fisheries 
agencies11 will be employed during Phase II of PROP to ensure that each of these agencies pro-actively engage in 
supporting the national projects to strengthen their commitment and collaboration toward shared management of 
their oceanic and coastal fisheries resources.  
 
 

PROPOSED PDO/RESULTS 

 
A. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of targeted beneficiaries in selected crops and livestock value-chains 
and to improve management of targeted fisheries.  
 
B. Key Results 
 
Progress will be measured against the following PDO-level indicators: 

(a) Increased yields in selected crops and livestock value-chains 

(b) Increased value of sale in selected crops and livestock value-chains 

(c) Number of fisheries management plans implemented 

(d) Total number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 

 
Direct beneficiaries are expected to be semi-commercial and commercial farming households and farmers, as well as 
small and medium enterprises (small agribusiness involved in collecting, processing, packaging and marketing activities, 
but also inputs suppliers). MAF will also directly benefit from capacity building activities. 
 
A detailed results framework will be developed during preparation.  
 

 

11 Pacific Islands Fisheries Forum Agency (FFA), Pacific Community (SPC), Parties of the Nauru Agreement Office (PNAO), Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS) 



PROJECT CONTEXT 

 
A. Concept 
 
1. Description 
The Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project (P115351) is currently in its last year, closing 31 
December 2018, and has achieved significant accomplishments for Samoan farmers, as well as relevant government 
departments. Based on SACEP’s successes, the government of Samoa would like to build on these achievements and 
take advantage of the opportunities presented.  
Through its objectives of increasing crops and livestock productivity and access to market increase as well as improving 
the management of targeted fisheries, this project may contribute to: (i) import substitution and increase the supply 
and consumption of domestically produced food; (ii) boost exports of some commodities, and (iii) strengthen resilience 
of farming households to climate change and climate-induced disasters (cyclones, heavy rains, prolonged dry seasons).  
 
It is proposed that SAFPROM will have four components.  
Component 1: Creating an enabling environment for increased productivity and access to markets for target farming 
and fishing households. This will include: 

a. Institutional capacity building activities in the MAF as well as current and potential cooperatives and 

associations. Activities will be based on a needs assessment and a capacity building action plan. The project 

will also support the establishment of an Agriculture Sector Coordination Division within the MAF for 

project management. This component will also help reviewing the regulatory and policy framework and 

update it if needed. A special focus will be looked at national standards that affect the capacity of Samoan 

agriculture products to reach specific high value markets. 

b. Development and improvement of infrastructure and equipment of public good nature. On the model of 

SACEP (with the Static and Mobile Slaughtering Units and the Tissue Culture Laboratory), this sub-

component will support the development of feasibility studies, work and equipment of key collective 

infrastructures that have been identified as bottlenecks for the development of the sector. For instance, in 

Savai’I island, a small veterinary laboratory and a fruits and vegetable Packhouse would help farmers to 

address their animal diseases and packaging concerns. 

 
Component 2: Support to farming and fishing households through a matching grant program (MGP). The design of 
which will be informed through a review of the MGP under SACEP. As per the GoS Concept Note, this financing 
mechanism should expand, not only to increase the number of farmers benefiting, but also to allow farmers’ groups to 
work together in post-harvest handling and agro-processing. It will help establishing alliances between the farmers, 
fishers, their groups and cooperatives and services providers or buyers. This MGP will give priority to sub-projects that 
promote innovative technologies aimed at improving productivity and quality for products for which there is a market 
demand. It will also support climate change mitigation activities through for instance intensification of livestock 
production, pasture management, improved feeding rations and practices using local products; and adaptation by 
promoting inter alia poly-tunnels to protect crops against heavy rains, water collection and small-scale irrigation to 
cope with prolonged dry seasons, etc. – therefore contributing to strengthened resilience to climate-related events. 
 
Regarding coastal fisheries, this component, through the MGP, will provide the opportunity to strengthen the 
community based fisheries management program (CBFMP) that has been implemented since 1995. This could upgrade 
the CBFMP to assess potential development support for participating communities or look at income generating 
activities for local communities. Over 100 villages have joined the program. Other coastal fisheries areas may include 

effective management regimes for the sea cucumber fishery (hatchery production, grow out and possibly processing).  
Post-harvest and value adding for low value fish are key components as community undertakings. 
 
Component 3: Aims to help GoS strengthen management of the region’s long-line tuna fisheries while identifying 
opportunities for sustainably increasing domestic revenues from this shared resource. This component will allow 
Samoa to join the PROP and is proposed to be financed through the following IDA grant resources: US$ 3 million in 
national IDA and US$ 6 million in regional IDA. 
  
Towards this objective, the component will support GoS’ regional and national activities to:  

a. Strengthen its capacity to engage effectively in the Tokelau Arrangement, the Western and Central Pacific 

Fisheries Management Commission (WCPFC) and other regional forums;  

b. Strengthen capacity and establishment of a national observer program 

c. Invest in and implement robust Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS), stock monitoring and fisheries 

management mechanisms and schemes. This includes upgrading Samoa’s Fisheries Information 

Management Systems and skills on MCS, carrying out joint regional patrol operations, boarding inspections, 

data collection, analysis and application; and combating Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) fishing 

d. Develop and implement strategies to enhance the competitiveness of the domestic longline fleet and the 

oversight and value of oceanic fishing activities within their EEZ including enhancing transshipment and 

related services.     

 
Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (Total Cost: US$0): Following an eligible crisis or 
emergency, the government of Samoa may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support emergency 
response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted grant resources under the project 
from other project components to cover emergency response. These activities would be carried out, as needed to 
ensure continued achievement of the project development objective. This component will only be used in the event that 
an emergency response is required. 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project would be implemented over a period of five years on Upolu and Savaii islands. Samoa is made up of nine 

islands with four main inhabited islands (Upolu,Savaii, Manono and Apolima) and has a total land area is 2,830 km2. The 
islands are of volcanic origin dominated by olivine basaltic rocks. The area is generally mountainous. 
  
Samoa has a population of approximately 197,000 people, of which 97% are Polynesian. The majority of people live on 

Upolu and Savaii. Settlements and agricultural activity on these islands are concentrated on the coastal plains and rolling 
slopes. 
 
Approximately 60,000 ha or 21% of the total land area is under crops or grazing regimes. Forest cover is approximately 

60%. Samoa’s 12 terrestrial national parks, reserves and community conservation areas are located on Upolu and Savaii. 


The country’s reef area is approximately 10,000 km2 and its exclusive economic zone is approximately 131000 km2. The 
main fishery landing sites in Samoa include Apia (Upolu), Salelologa (Savaii) and Apolima-uta (Upolu) with local 
subsistence landings scattered in coastal villages around inhabited islands . Samoa has three (3) protected marine areas 
(inshore). 
 
As for offshore fishery, Samoa’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is the smallest in the Pacific region and tuna longline 

fishery, particularly albacore, is the main offshore fishery. While tuna used to be the country’s largest export earner, 
recent years have seen a decline in the overall tuna catches, with a more than 50 percent reduction between 2009 and 
2013.  Transshipment operations by Taiwanese longliners began in Apia, Samoa in 2010. As of April 2012, there had been 
34 such operations, with 6 occurring in 2012.  Numerous smaller domestic longliners also transship in Samoa with the 
target market being the cannery in neighboring American Samoa. In 2014 Samoa signed onto the Tokelau Arrangement, a 
joint approach to managing the South Pacific Longline Fishery. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The current World Bank financed Samoa Agriculture Competitiveness Enhancement Project (SACEP) has addressed 

safeguards' capacity constraints within MAF through a Coordination group (PCG) which includes an environmental and 
social (E&S) officer. For SAFPROM, E&S capacity within MAF is expected to be further strengthened with the 
establishment of a dedicated Agriculture Sector Coordination Division (ASCD) including a senior E&S specialist, to 
effectively coordinate and management agriculture sector activities, including environmental and social safeguards. This 
unit will be supported by a Centralized Technical Services and Support Unit (CTSSU) within the MOF which will also 
include an E&S Advisor. Her/his role will be to build capacity of E&S specialists within the line ministries, including the 
ASCD, and advise these teams on complex issues on an ad hoc basis. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Thomas John Callander, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Nicholas John Valentine, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project would finance a number of small-scale, 
household-based farming (i.e. livestock development 
and crop development) and community fisheries 
production/marketing subprojects through a small 
grants scheme. Negative environmental and social 
impacts associated with these activities are expected 
to be minor, localized and temporary primarily 
because of their small-scale and 
household/community focus. 
 
The project would support the development and 
improvement of collective infrastructure and/or 
equipment (i.e. small veterinary laboratory, 
renovation of a local fish market or a fruits and 
vegetable pack-house). These small to medium-scale 
investments have the potential to cause some minor 
adverse environmental and social impacts however 
these are readily managed through standard 
mitigation measures. 
 
The project would finance the development and 
implementation of strategies to enhance the 
competitiveness of the domestic longline tuna fleet 
and the value of oceanic fishing activities within the 
Samoa’s EEZ including enhancing transshipment and 
related services.  
  
An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) is proposed as the safeguards instrument given 
that the specific locations of the investments are not 
known and these will be determined through the grant 
process. The ESMF will incorporate the requirements 
of the World Group’s Environmental, Health and 
Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) and industry specific 
guidelines for agribusiness, food production and 
pesticides management. 
 
The project also includes a Contingency Emergency 
Response Component to support emerency activities 
that ensure continued achievement of the project 
development objective. The ESMF will outline the 
approach and principles for managing potential E&S 
impacts and risks of the CERC including ascreening 
process in accordance with the World Bank’s Rapid 
Response to Crises and Emergencies: Procedural 
Guidelines. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

For agriculture and livestock, the project will not 
finance any activities that significantly convert or 
degrade any protected areas or natural habitats as the 
screening procedures in the ESMF will exclude all 
subprojects with these impacts. 
The project will support enhanced management of 
coastal and ocean fisheries/ecosystems. While 
proposed activities are expected to enhance positive 
and sustainable returns to these important habitats, 
the ESMF will contain measures to properly manage 
the risk of any unforeseen adverse environmental 
impact on natural habitats, including critical natural 
habitats, as well as measures to enhance positive 
environmental impacts. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

For agriculture (crops and livestock), the policy will not 
finance activities that impact on the health and quality 
of forests. 
For fisheries, the project may support marine 
ecosystem conservation activities (i.e. mangroves 
conservation). 
The ESMF will contain measures to properly manage 
the risk of any unforeseen adverse environmental 
impacts of these activities, as well as measures to 
enhance positive environmental impacts. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The client will review and update the current SACEP 
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) following the 
standards and requirements set forth in OP4.09 and 
the World Group’s Environmental, Health and Safety 
Guidelines (EHSGs) for agribusiness and food 
production. The project will include measures to 
strengthen the institutional capacity for implementing 
IPM in project areas. This will include a stronger focus 
on health and safety. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project will not finance any activities that will have 
impacts on physical cultural resources; screening and 
chance find procedures will be included in the ESMF to 
exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The ethnic structure in Samoa is predominantly ethnic 
Samoan (92.6%) with a minority of Europeans and 
biracial European/Polynesian. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

At present, no involuntary land acquisition is expected 
under the project. The majority of sub-projects will be 
undertaken on customary land with the voluntary 
participation of grants scheme recipient landowners. 
The only exception will be the siting of collective 
infrastructure facilities which will be either on 
Government-owned land or land secured via voluntary 
land donation. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared to address these potential scenarios. 
In fishery, certain activities may involve the restriction 
of access to natural resources and/or marine 
protected areas which local people may depend upon 
for their livelihood. A Process Framework will be 
developed in compliance with OP4.12 requirements to 
address these potential issues.  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any dams as defined under 
OP 4.37. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not impact or relate to any known 
international waterways as defined under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project is not located in any known disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Aug 15, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
As soon as the GoS will access the Project preparation Facility, the recruitment of an E&S specialist and a consultant to 

develop both the ESMF and the PMP. It is therefore expected that the safeguards documents will be ready by mid-August 
to inform the Appraisal stage ISDS. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 14

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20672

Date Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Kosovo Project ID: P158710
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P112526

Project Name: Kosovo Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Third Additional 
Financing (P158710)

Parent Project 
Name:

Agriculture and Rural Development (P112526)

Region: EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

16-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

28-Apr-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
International Development Association (IDA) 22.00
LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 5.84
Total Project Cost 27.84

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No
B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Over the past decade, Kosovo➢❨ s overall economic growth has been generally positive, 
averaging about 4-5 percent annually, driven mostly by massive donor-funded reconstruction 
efforts as well as remittances from its diaspora. The economy has demonstrated a considerable 
degree of resilience, with principal macro fiscal and financial indicators reflecting that the country 
has performed considerably better than any of its neighbors in the Western Balkans over the past 
decade. Kosovo is a potential EU candidate country and economic reforms are largely driven by 
the prospect of eventual EU accession. 
 
Despite the positive trend in growth and relatively stable and resilient economy, Kosovo remains 
one of the poorest countries in Europe. As of 2011, approximately 30 percent of its population of 
1.8 million lived below the national poverty line of ➢❪¬1.72 a day and about 10.2 percent were 
living in extreme poverty on less than ➢❪¬1.20 day. Unemployment is widespread, estimated at 
about 30 percent in 2013, the highest in South Eastern Europe. Unemployment among women is 
higher, estimated at 38.8 percent. Demographically, Kosovo is Europe➢❨ s youngest country, 
where the average age is estimated at 26 years.  Unemployment among the youth is especially 
high, estimated at 61.0 percent in 2014. 
 
The main driver of Kosovo➢❨ s economic growth has been consumption, fueled by remittances 
rather than income earned domestically. The steady consumption demand has been met mainly by 
imports given the country➢❨ s narrow, undiversified, and uncompetitive production base.  There 
is little export-orientation and imports remain large.  The current growth model based on large 
financial inflows is unsustainable and the main challenge for the country remains the 
establishment of conditions conducive to promoting self-sustained growth founded on increased 
domestic productivity and export competitiveness, within the framework of reducing high 
unemployment, improving human capital and building physical infrastructure. 
 
Kosovo➢❨ s location, EU membership prospects and free market access to the EU and Central 
European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) countries offer strong opportunities for sustained and 
rapid overall development. The government is committed to instituting reforms to promote 
sustainable economic development and is working to put in place the policies, institutions and 
investments that will help unleash the country➢❨ s growth and export potential. In this context, 
the National Development Strategy 2015-2020, adopted in January 2016, emphasizes four priority 
pillars: (a) human capital and employment; (b) good governance and rule of law; (c) competitive 
industries; and (d) infrastructure development.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture plays a significant role in Kosovo➢❨ s economy.  It is an important contributor to 
GDP, accounting for about 11.4 percent of GDP in 2014 (second only after wholesale and retail 
trade). Over 62 percent of the country➢❨ s population lives in rural areas and depends, directly or 
indirectly, on agriculture for its livelihood. The sector is the largest private employer, accounting 
for about 35 percent of total employment, although primarily on an informal basis.  Poverty in 
rural areas is especially high and over 40 percent of the rural population is unemployed. The lack 
of job perspective, especially among the rural young population is putting a strain on social 
cohesion and encouraging out-migration. Often, agriculture serves as a safety net for much of the 
population. 



Page 3 of 14

 
Despite a steady growth in the sector since independence, Kosovo is the largest importer of food 
per capita in Europe. The country is highly dependent on imports to meet its food demands and 
the export/import ratio has been steadily increasing over the past decade.  In 2011, the value of 
imports of agricultural products was approximately ➢❪¬561.4 million while the value of exports 
was ➢❪¬26.2 million. Exports of agricultural products thus generated revenues to pay for only 4.6 
per cent of the cost of importing such products. Agricultural products account for about 10 
percent of all imports; of this, 30 percent comprises food products. 
 
This is primarily because the sector faces several diverse and inter-related challenges that prevent 
it from meeting its productive potential and hinder commercialization. Before the 1990s, Kosovo 
was largely food self-sufficient with large quantities of agricultural products exported to the 
region. However, after the war, this trend was reversed so that today, agriculture is largely 
subsistent/semi-subsistent in nature. The sector is characterized by small, fragmented land 
holdings, with average land holding size ranging between 1.5 and 2.0 ha, often spread across an 
average of seven smaller plots. Lack of and/or limited access to, inter alia, modern technologies, 
good quality inputs, irrigation, post-harvest management and processing infrastructure, credit, and 
markets pose serious challenges to the development of the sector.  In its current state, agriculture 
attracts limited private investments which effectively inhibit commercialization of the sector and 
the realization of socio-economic gains thereof. 
 
Two areas that offer good opportunities for the development of Kosovo➢❨ s agricultural sector 
include the horticulture and livestock subsectors. Horticulture and livestock farming are 
traditional economic activities in Kosovo, representing a rural cultural identity and there is a 
strong preference among the farming communities to remain engaged in these subsectors for their 
livelihood. Over the past decade, demand for high value horticulture products has surged more 
than any other food category and there is a strong consumer preference for locally grown fruits 
and vegetables, both for fresh consumption and processing. Livestock farming is predominant in 
the mountainous and remote areas of Kosovo where it often serves as the primary source of rural 
livelihood. With increased productivity and production  there is good potential for: (i) promoting 
import substitution; (ii) boosting exports, especially to EU and CEFTA countries; (iii) generating 
employment in rural areas; (iv) creating economic opportunities for women in agriculture 
production and especially value-added processing activities; and (v) providing opportunities for 
young farmers to be gainfully employed in these remunerative value chains. 
 
To harness the potential of these subsectors, especially the horticulture subsector, there is a 
critical need for improving irrigation delivery and services. Rainfall patterns show high variability 
in Kosovo and there is a crucial need for supplementary irrigation, especially during drier spells. 
For fruits and vegetables, irrigation is essential for increasing yields and ensuring quality and 
timely production. It is expected that with irrigation small farmers would move to more high-
value crops and specialized markets, and away from near-subsistence agriculture. 
 
Ageing irrigation infrastructure and lack of maintenance are reducing the level of irrigation use 
and impacting development of agriculture.  Most of the irrigation schemes were built in the 1970s 
and are showing signs of ageing. Moreover, the war of the 1990s damaged or destroyed large 
sections of country➢❨ s irrigation infrastructure. This coupled with expansion of urban and 
industrial areas in recent years has sharply reduced actual irrigable area and jeopardized existing 
irrigation investments. The area equipped for irrigation fell from approximately 71,000 ha before 



Page 4 of 14

the war to approximately 43,900 ha in 2014.  The area of irrigation use is also far lower than in 
the past. Between 2006 and 2012, the average area irrigated was only about 12,000 ha - 4,000 ha 
in small schemes and 8,000 ha within the areas serviced by the country➢❨ s three regional 
irrigation companies in Kosovo: Iber-Lepenc, Radoniqi-Dukagjini and Drini i Bardhe. 
 
Recognizing the significant role of agriculture in Kosovo➢❨ s overall economic development, the 
government is undertaking critical measures to re-vitalize the sector. The objectives of the 
National Agricultural and Rural Development Plan (NARDP 2014-2020 are to undertake actions 
to overcome bottlenecks holding back sustainable rural development in the country and align 
Kosovo➢❨ s rural sector with the axes of the EU Instrument for Pre-accession for Rural 
Development (IPARD). The NARDP lays out several measures for implementation support over 
the next five years, including inter alia, investments in the physical assets of agricultural holdings 
as well as processing and marketing of agricultural and fishery products; agri-environmental 
measures and organic farming; farm diversification and business development; improvements in 
training, advisory services and vocational training; land consolidation; and  irrigation.  On the 
institutional front, the government is building the capacity of important institutional structures, 
such as the Managing Authority and Paying Agency, for improved performance of the agriculture 
sector as well as to approximate their functioning with EU requirements. These efforts are being 
carried out with assistance from several donors, including EU, DANIDA, Suisse Interco-
operation, USAID, Austrian Development Agency, GIZ and the World Bank (through the 
ongoing IDA-financed Agriculture and Rural Development Project).

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The development objective of the project is to assist the Recipient to promote competitiveness 
and growth in the livestock and horticulture sub-sectors over the next decade through 
implementation of selected measures of its agricultural strategy and institutionaldevelopment.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
The development objective of the project is to improve productivity of and access to markets by 
project beneficiaries in the horticulture and livestock subsectors of Kosovo and strengthen 
institutional capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development.

Key Results 
The PDO-level Results Indicators comprise the following: (i) increased yields of key crops 
supported by the project ➢❨  tons/ha; (ii) increased yields of milk production per animal on 
livestock farms supported by the project ➢❨  liters/cow; (iiiu) increased sale of milk to processing 
companies; (iv) increased sales of horticultural products from farmers supported by aggregators; 
(v) increased number of farmers adopting improved agricultural technologies; (vi) preparation of 
Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP) sub-measures for investment support in line with 
EU-IPARD Guidelines

D.  Project Description

The Additional Financing, a US$22.0 million IDA credit, to be implemented over four years, 
would support the following activities: 
 
Component 1: Transferring Knowledge to the Rural Sector.  The AF will continue support for the 



Page 5 of 14

following sub-components: (a) Rural Advisory Service (RAS) Contracts under which training 
would be provided to potential applicants for the Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP) as 
well as to municipal advisors to assist the farming community in the preparation of such grant 
proposals as well as to national extension staff on technical topics; (b) Regional Knowledge 
Exchange under which the project will support the organization of study tours/visits to countries 
in the region to enable farmers and processors in the horticulture and livestock subsectors to learn 
and benefit from the knowledge and experiences of other agri-food producers and processors in 
the region; and (c) Institutional Strengthening of Rural Advisory Services. The AF will continue 
to support the municipal advisory service centers in delivering effective services to the rural 
community through the provision of training, equipment and select operating costs. 
 
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable Rural Development. The AF will 
support the following activities: 
(a) Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP). RDGP support will be provided to farmers and 
processors in the livestock subsector.  As under KARDP, the RDGP will be implemented at the 
national level ➢❨  for potential beneficiaries in all municipalities of Kosovo.  The Call for 
Proposals would be open to all farmers and processors residing on the territory of Kosovo. 
Implementation of RDGP would follow the same processes and procedures as under the ongoing 
project, including extra points for women applicants and additional co-financing for beneficiaries 
(both men and women) under the age of 40 as well as for climate friendly agricultural practices.    
 
(b) Promoting Development of the Horticulture Subsector. The objective of this component is to 
promote the development of the horticulture subsector by strengthening backward and forward 
linkages in the value chain of the subsector. The aim is to improve productivity, quality, value 
addition, and ma rket linkages within the subsector to enhance its competitiveness towards 
increased exports and import substitution as well as job creation, improved beneficiary incomes 
and increased economic opportunities for women and youth in the rural sector.  It will target 
support to small holder farmers that dominate the rural landscape and provide them opportunities 
for assured markets and  improved livelihoods while assisting the commercial and semi-
commercial agro-enterprises to reach both domestic and export markets, create jobs and improve 
incomes.  
 
The entry point for project support will be the Aggregators, i.e. private Collection Centers (CCs) 
and Agro-processors, handling or procuring horticultural produce.  The project will provide 
matching grants to qualifying Aggregators, who will: (i) promote and strengthen backward 
integration strategies through the provision of supply contracts and extension services to small-
holder farmers, thereby guaranteeing farmers markets for their produce as well as enabling them 
to enhance their productivity while improving quality (including meeting Global GAP 
certification requirements); and (ii) exploit the value addition potential of the sector through 
improved postharvest management by increasing their capacity for handling and processing.  
Thus the project will enable Aggregators to increase the intake of fresh produce from farmers 
(upstream) and increase their supply of fresh produce and processed products to domestic and 
export markets (downstream).  By introducing upgrades in the value chain - quality checks, 
packaging, labeling, etc, the project will reorient firms towards more lucrative export markets. 
 
Potential aggregators will be invited to prepare business plans and submit applications to enhance 
and expand their operations.  Funding for selected subprojects would be allocated through a 
competitive bidding process. The maximum size of the grant would be Ã¢➢❨ Â¬200,000.  The 



Page 6 of 14

submitted business plans will be reviewed, evaluated and scored against clearly defined criteria 
by an independent Evaluation Committee. Eligibility criteria and detailed arrangements for 
implementation of the matching grants will be elaborated in the Horticulture Development Grant 
Manual. 
 
(s) Institutional Capacity Building. The AF will continue to support capacity building of the 
Managing Authority and Paying Agency through the provision of training, personnel and 
equipment as needed. Project support will assist in approximating their functioning to EU 
requirements and contribute to their efforts towards EU accreditation.   The project will also 
support capacity building within the Kosovo Institute of Agriculture (KIA) to enhance its ability 
to promote food safety and quality standards in the livestock and horticulture subsectors of 
Kosovo through the provision of select equipment to strengthen capacity of the food testing 
laboratory. 
 
Component 3: Support for Irrigation. The AF would support rehabilitation works in the Radoniqi-
Dukagjini Irrigation Scheme, located in an area of high agricultural productivity.  Horticulture is 
the dominant economic activity in the region and with improved irrigation delivery and services 
there is a high likelihood of improved productivity of high value crops. Specific rehabilitation 
investments in the scheme will focus on, inter alia, lining and repair of main canal sections, 
replacement of moving parts; pipes, where necessary, aqueduct crossing on the Drini river, and 
the restoration of irrigation delivery in two blocks, namely the Janosh scheme in the upstream part 
of the system; as well as the Doblibare scheme which is currently dysfunctional. Minor dam 
safety actions (non-structural), as identified by the dam safety assessments, will be supported as 
well. Modernization will include selective automation of scheme monitoring to increase water and 
energy use efficiency. A technical study is underway to further specify the technical requirements 
and prepare bidding documents for scheme construction works as well as identify equipment and 
spare part requirements. 
 
In providing rehabilitation support to the scheme, the project will take a broader modernization 
approach and integrate managerial upgrading with the technical rehabilitation to improve both 
resource utilization and water delivery service to users, optimizing resource utilization and 
ensuring institutional and financial sustainability. This includes the support for a Management 
Information System, SCADA for improved operations, support for maintaining a strategic supply 
of spare parts and maintenance equipment; harmonization of planning and budgeting with 
municipal plans as well as water users➢❨  demands. 
 
Component 4: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation. The existing 
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within MAFRD will be responsible for the daily management, 
administration and coordination of the project's activities in accordance with Bank requirements, 
including procurement, financial management, monitoring and evaluation, and audits.  Its 
capacity would be enhanced through the hiring of an irrigation specialist who will be responsible 
for the implementation of the irrigation activity as well as additional short-term technical 
specialists as needed.

Component Name
Component 1: Transferring Knowledge to the Rural Sector.
Comments (optional)



Page 7 of 14

Component Name
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable Rural Development
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Component 3: Support for Irrigation
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project will be undertaken throughout Kosovo.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Bekim Imeri (GSU03)
Esma Kreso (GEN03)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development 
(MAFRD).  A dedicated Project Implementation Unit, headed by the General Secretary, has been 
established under the ongoing KARDP for overall management of the project, including the fiduciary 
(procurement, financial management), monitoring, evaluation, training and administration 
requirements as well as coordination with donors and other government units.  The Rural 
Development Grant Program (RDGP) will be implemented by the Managing Authority (MA) and 
Paying Agency (PA). The  MA is responsible for identifying the measures for support under the 
RDGP and prepares the procedures for implementation of the selected RDGP sub-measures.  
Towards this, it establishes Working Groups with representation from the private sector and civil 
society.  The PA is in charge of administering the RDGP, including the selection, awarding, 
monitoring and disbursement processes for the sub-projects.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes Potential environmental impacts are anticipated under 
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable 
Rural Development and Component 3: Support for Irrigation. 
The major portion of Component 2 remains the provision of 



Page 8 of 14

grants which were also administered under the original project. 
The grants were awarded based on a screening criteria set forth 
in the ESMF prepared for the project in October 2010 and 
subsequently revised in 2015. This revision solely dealt with 
changes in the Kosovo environmental legislation and did not in 
any form alter the overall screening procedure within the 
ESMF. The screening criteria as set forth in the ESMF helps to 
screen out project activities corresponding to a category A, and 
to provide adequate due diligence on a case-by-case basis for 
the rural grants. The ESMF had undergone a slight revision in 
January 2017, where the irrigation activities have also been 
added in the project description and small changes were made 
to ensure that all activities even beyond grants are covered 
through the process in the ESMF. The screening and due 
diligence mechanisms remain the same as within the original 
ESMF from 2010.  
The approach outlined in the ESMF from January 2017 will 
apply to the rural grants, matching grants, irrigation rehab and 
any activity that would be proposed to be financed within the 
project or the subsequent AFs. Furthermore, any strategic and 
planning documents to be produced under Component 3(b) 
will also incorporate adequate safeguards requirements within 
the Terms of Reference for any proposed study or plan.  
The environmental impacts associated with the grants program 
and irrigation rehab should be readily mitigated through sound 
construction practices (dust and noise, waste management, 
material sourcing) while the operational impacts can be 
mitigated through environmentally friendly farming 
approaches (manure management, waste disposal, emissions 
from food processing facilities, improved water resource use).  
Under Component 3, rehabilitation of the Radoniqi irrigation 
scheme is foreseen which would lead to better management of 
water resources. This activity will potentially cause minor 
construction related impacts (noise, dust, waste generation).   
A full and robust ESMP will be prepared to address risks and 
impacts of implementation of this scheme, including assessing 
impacts to other water users. 
➢❨❫

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

No There are no implications on natural habitats foreseen.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No There are no implications on forested areas foreseen.
Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes Due to the fact that the project would more than likely lead to 
increased agricultural production, it is safe to assume that there 
would be an increased need for pest management. As such, an 
Integrated Pest Management Plan was part of the original 
ESMF (2010) andalso the revised ESMF (2015 and 2017).



Page 9 of 14

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No There are no activities involving physical / cultural resources 
foreseen.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

No There are no implications for indigenous people.

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

No This safeguards will not be triggered because the potential 
works proposed for the scheme rehabilitation are as follows: 
 
(i) Lining and repair of main canal sections, replacement 
of parts such as valves, etc.   
(ii) rehabilitation of of irrigation delivery in two secondary 
sub-schemes  
(iii) minor works related to dam safety and the Drini river 
aqueduct 
 
Given the nature of rehabilitation works, there will be no need 
for land take although there might be some crop damages for a 
temporary period of time while the works are ongoing. The 
protocol defined in the ESMF addresses the crop damage 
compensation which will be operationalized with concrete 
ESMPs .

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

Yes Although the project will not build any dams, the Radoniqi 
Irrigation scheme depends upon the existing Radoniqi Dam for 
its effective functioning as the scheme draws its raw water 
directly from the Radoniqi reservoir controlled by a 61 meter 
high clay-core embankment dam. Several  Dam Safety 
Assessments have been carried out in the recent past for 
Radoniqi Dam, including in 2000, 2002, and 2006 under the 
WB supported Pilot Water Supply Project, and most recently 
in 2012 by the Water Task Force as part of a countrywide Dam 
Safety Review. While none of these reviews raise any concerns 
on imminent dam safety they make recommendations for 
operation and maintenance procedures and safety-related 
measures that are required to ensure an acceptable standard of 
safety. More precisely, this includes the need for critical 
documentation and information on dam safety, including 
geotechnical information, an update on and improvement of 
status of control instruments (inclinometers and piezometers 
are reported as largely dysfunctional) and electrical 
installations. Also, it is observed that there is no dam safety 
(monitoring) plan, although a letter from the dam operator 
states that geodetic measurements have been carried out to 
some extent over the past years. Most of the recommendations 
have not been fully implemented since. The project proposes to 
adopt a composite of the 2005 and 2012 recommendations, to 
be confirmed by a dam safety panel to be established, and to 



Page 10 of 14

finance those under the project. The following activities are 
envisaged to be included under the program: updated safety 
analysis, including full geodetic survey, rehabilitation of dam 
safety instrumentation and an emergency preparedness plan.

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

Yes Component 3 includes works on rehabilitation of the Radoniqi 
irrigation scheme, which is part of the trans-boundary Drini 
river basin. However, considering that the works will focus on 
better use and management of the existing irrigation scheme 
the team does not foresee any issues on water quality or 
quantity to downstream users. As such, an Exception to 
Notification was granted on December 16, 2016 by ECA VP.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not be implemented in any disputed areas.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Potential environmental impacts are anticipated under Component 2: Enhancing Investments to 
Promote Sustainable Rural Development and Component 3: Support for Irrigation. The major 
portion of Component 2 remains the provision of grants which were also administered under the 
original project.  The grants were awarded based on a screening criteria set forth in the ESMF 
prepared for the project in October 2010 and subsequently revised in 2015. This revision solely 
dealt with changes in the Kosovo environmental legislation and did not in any form alter the 
overall screening procedure within the ESMF. The screening criteria as set forth in the ESMF 
helps to screen out project activities corresponding to a category A, and to provide adequate due 
diligence on a case-by-case basis for the rural grants. The ESMF had undergone a slight revision 
in January 2017, where the irrigation activities have also been added in the project description and 
small changes were made to ensure that all activities even beyond grants are covered through the 
process in the ESMF. The screening and due diligence mechanisms remain the same as within the 
original ESMF from 2010.  
The approach outlined in the ESMF from January 2017 will apply to the rural grants, matching 
grants, irrigation rehab and any activity that would be proposed to be financed within the project 
or the subsequent AFs. Furthermore, any strategic and planning documents to be produced under 
Component 3(b) will also incorporate adequate safeguards requirements within the Terms of 
Reference for any proposed study or plan.  
The environmental impacts associated with the grants program and irrigation rehab should be 
readily mitigated through sound construction practices (dust and noise, waste management, 
material sourcing) while the operational impacts can be mitigated through environmentally 
friendly farming approaches (manure management, waste disposal, emissions from food 
processing facilities, improved water resource use).  
Under Component 3 rehabilitation of the Radoniqi irrigation scheme is foreseen which would lead 
to better management of water resources. This activity will potentially cause minor construction 
related impacts already described above that can be mitigated through a site-specific ESMP, while 
additional concerns include dam safety issues and also the potential for impacts on international 
waterways as the reservoir and the scheme are located within the Drini river basin. 
The overall project would lead to an increase in agricultural practices therefore having 



Page 11 of 14

implications on pest management, which should apply and follow the Integrated Pest Management 
Plan as prepared under the original ESMF.  There are no social safeguard related issues. The 
works proposed are rehabilitation of existing schemes. Rehabilitation of lining of open main canal 
and secondary pressurized (piped) schemes where necessary in two sections. There will be no need 
for neither land take nor establishment of right of way. Crop damages because of the rehabilitation 
works will be addressed in ESMFS and related ESMPS 
The Terms of Reference for Component 3(b): Strategy and Investment Framework for the 
Irrigation Sector, will incorporate safeguards requirements to ensure that there is due diligence of 
all potential safeguards aspects under the propsoed Strategy/Investment Framework.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
There are no long term or indirect impacts associated with the project, beyond the potential 
increase in agricultural production and therefore implications on pest management, where the  
Integrated Pest Management Plan as prepared under the original ESMF should apply.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
There are no project alternatives considered. The screening mechanism for the grants would allow 
to either accept or deny a sub-project based on their associated impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower has applied the ESMF screening in the later grant calls, while some issues remained 
in the first call and the due diligence was carried out by an independent consultant retroactively. 
The borrower has also provided educational trainings and seminars on ESMF compliance and 
sound environmental practices in 2014. The Borrower has a dedicated M&E staff that also 
provides support to the implementation of the ESMF, and as required can hire an external 
consultant to be engaged in the implementation of the ESMF policies. The site-specific ESMP for 
the Radoniqi irrigation scheme will more than likely be carried out by a company or consultant 
outside the Borrower's team and will try to streamline the WB requirements and those of the 
Kosovo environmental legislation into one process. As for the grants, one of the requirements is 
that no grant is awarded without the environmental and social due diligence in place. This 
requirement is strictly supervised by all of the PIU and also by the World Bank team.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include representatives of the Project Implementation Unit and the MAFRD, 
as well as the members of the local communities where projects will take place. As such, the 
ESMF was subject to public consultations and disclosure in 2010 (as documented in the original 
ESMF) while each of the subsequent ESMPs prepared for each specific project was subject to 
disclosure and public consultations. For small scale projects public consultations were replaced by 
consent forms signed by all of the neighbors. The revised ESMF (as of January 2017) will be 
disclosed through the MAFRD website and Bank's Infoshop prior to the Appraisal of the AF.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 15-Oct-2010

Date of submission to InfoShop 02-Dec-2010



Page 12 of 14

For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Kosovo 18-Jan-2017
Comments: The revised ESMF that would make it applicable also to the Irrigation scheme was 

disclosed on January 18, 2017.  
This revised version was also disclosed in Infoshop on January 19, 2017.

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 15-Oct-2010

Date of submission to InfoShop 09-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Mar-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC21901 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 

P161473  Lao Agriculture 
Commercialization 
Project (P161473) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Nov 06, 2017 Mar 30, 2018 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 

Department of Planning and 
Cooperation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase commercialization of selected value chains in the project areas. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrowing Agency    2.00  

International Development Association (IDA)   35.00  

Total Project Cost   37.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Lao PDR has achieved good progress in economic growth and poverty reduction over the past decade. Average 
growth of the gross domestic product (GDP) in the past decade was around 8 percent per annum. Poverty declined from 
41.4 percent in 2002/03 to 28.8 percent in 2012/13. With a GDP per capita of around US$1,600 in 2014, Lao PDR has 
become a lower-middle income country.  
 
2. Despite impressive macroeconomic achievements, poverty still remains high, especially in rural areas and 
among ethnic groups. Over 80 percent of the poor are concentrated in rural areas. About 40 percent of Mon Khmer and 
Hmong ethnic groups are poor, compared to 15 percent of Lao-Tai people, and ethnic groups account for about two thirds 
of people having no access to formal education. Stunting is also pronounced among ethnic groups.   
 
3. In many rural areas of the country, a high prevalence of food insecurity and malnutrition is still a major problem. 
Rice shortage often takes place for about 3-4 months per year. Prevalent farming systems are largely subsistent and 
generally lack diversification. Although the country is able to achieve self-sufficiency in rice at the national level in the 
normal year, there are still challenges in addressing food security due to the instability of annual production resulted from 
poor farming practices, ineffective water management, and frequent natural disasters (i.e. floods and droughts). 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
4. Agriculture is an important sector in Lao PDR, but it is currently underperforming. The sector employs two-thirds 
of the country’s labor force, but generates only 22 percent of the GDP. In the last decade, agricultural growth averaged 
3.7 percent, which is less than half of the overall GDP growth. Agricultural farming is largely subsistent, producing one 
crop a year, mainly paddy with low productivity. Currently, irrigated agricultural land accounts for less than 15 percent of 
cultivated land and the remaining 85 percent is rain-fed. Recently, there have been emerging signs of agricultural 
commercialization and diversification (i.e. crop rotation or aquaculture with rice cultivation in low land areas; commercial 
production of maize in Xayabury province, and vegetables in Vientiane province). In the bigger context, however, these 
developments are still relatively scattered and small. 
 
5. Lao PDR’s agriculture sector is constrained by subsistent farming and small scale production with low level of 
commercialization, limited processing capacity, underdeveloped supporting infrastructure, and weak public services. 
Value chains of rice, maize, and vegetables are currently underdeveloped. There are good opportunities and potentials 
for improving their performance substantially through improving farm productivity and enhancing value chains. While the 
former could be realized by adopting quality seed/ farm inputs, improved farming technologies, upgrades of irrigation and 
improved water management, improved extension services/applied research, enhanced farming mechanization, 
improved harvest/postharvest facilities, and better farming diversification/crop rotation, the latter could be achieved by 
improved regulatory framework to facilitate trade and monitor quality standards, market analysis/research, 
transportation/ logistics, strategic support to agribusinesses, contract farming, and product branding and marketing. The 
recently completed project “Engaging the Private Sector to Develop the Lao Rice Industry” (EMRIP) demonstrated the 
readiness of the growing number of rice mills to modernize their facilities, engage in contract farming and develop 
marketing strategies.  

 
6. There are concerns related to the quality and sustainability of agricultural growth. Rice is the most important 
crop in the agriculture sector of Lao PDR. Rice production dominates agricultural land use, occupying nearly 56 percent of 


the total harvested area of all crops. More than 80 percent of the Lao rice crop consists of various types of glutinous rice. 
Maize, which constitutes about 12 percent of the harvested area, is the next most important crop. No other single crop or 
category of crops takes up more than around 5 percent of the cultivated land. In terms of the tonnage of crops produced 
at the national level, rice represents 81 percent of total weight of crops produced. Lack of diversification and heavily 
reliance on rice while there is an increasingly fierce competition in global rice markets are the key challenges to 
competiveness and sustainability of the agricultural growth of Lao PDR in the future. 
 
7. Addressing the risks and shortcomings of the sector will require re-organization of agricultural production and 
greater commercialization to support strategic value chains. According to the findings of the Project Identification 
Mission jointly carried out by Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and the World Bank in November 2016, three 
strategic value chains were identified, which include: (i) rice value chains in the selected low land provinces; (ii) maize 
value chains in Xayabury province; and (iii) vegetables value chains in Vientiane province and possibly Vientiane Capital. 
These value chains are currently operating far below their potentials due to: (1) weak agriculture knowledge and 
information system (i.e. weak research and extension and private sector linkages, inadequate/weak delivery of extension 
and training services, use of poor quality seeds, lack of agricultural diversification); (2) poor production infrastructure (i.e. 
lack/degraded irrigation canals, poor maintenance of irrigation infrastructure, poor feeder roads to facilitate in-scheme 
mechanization); (3) inadequate mechanization facilities and equipment (i.e. lack of mechanization for harvesting and post-
harvest drying and processing, lack of  equipment and facilities for quality testing and storage); (4) lack of access to finance 
(i.e. underdeveloped banking sector, low capacity of rice mills to prepare business plans and secure loans); (5) inadequate 
enabling environment (i.e. constraints to new business entry/ business licensing, quality control and certification, public 
services to promote trade); and (6) insecure agricultural land tenure (i.e. risks of conversion of agricultural land to other 
uses, reduced incentives to invest and manage land by farmers). These constraints not only result in low farm productivity 
but also are generic causes for the poor performance of the agriculture sector and slow process of agricultural 
commercialization. 

 
8. The Government has recognized the need to promote a substantial shift in the agriculture sector from 
subsistent farming to sustainable commercial agriculture following cluster development and value chain approaches. 
On November 18, 2016, the Government through Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) sent an Official Letter to the 
World Bank requesting the support on agricultural commercialization in order to improve the sector’s performance 
especially along the rice value chains. Yet, there is also an increasing attention of the Government to other crops such a 
maize, horticulture, beans and pulses, and aquaculture, to increase diversification and farm incomes, as well as to improve 
food security and reduce malnutrition. 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

9. The proposed project is aligned with the National Agriculture Sector Plan to 2020 and Strategy to 2025, in which 
improving the commercialization and competiveness of the agriculture sector are the top priorities. The proposed 
project also supports several objectives of the Eighth National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP), namely 
Outcome 2.2 “Food security ensured and incidence of malnutrition reduced” and Outcome 3.3 “Reducing the instability 
of agricultural production caused by impacts of natural disasters.”  
 
10. The proposed project is consistent with the Systematic Country Diagnostic (2016), which placed an increase in 
agricultural productivity to support incomes among the top priorities to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity in 
Lao PDR, and with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2017-2021. It contributes to achieving its Objective 1.2 
“Making it easier to do business and create jobs” under the Focus Area 1 “Supporting Inclusive Growth” and Objective 2.1 
“Reducing the prevalence of malnutrition” under the Focus Area 2 “Investing in People.”     


 
11. The proposed project is closely aligned with the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared 
prosperity and with the global Sustainable Development Goals, including Zero Hunger (Goal 2) and Climate Action (Goal 
13).   The project would directly provide benefits to local farmers in four provinces, namely Xayabury (those associated 
with maize value chains), Vientiane Province (vegetables value chains), and Bolykhamxay and Khammouane Provinces and 
Vientiane Capital (rice value chains). Most farmers in these provinces are practicing subsistent agriculture with low/ 
unstable productivity and low incomes. Generally speaking, rural farmers among poor groups in Lao PDR and some of 
them are living under extreme poverty. 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

12. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase commercialization of selected value chains in the project 
areas. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
13. The proposed PDO-level results indicators are:  
 

(i) Number of project beneficiaries (men and women; core indicator);  

(ii) An increase in productivity from those farmers adopting new technologies; 

(iii) An increase in the sale volumes (percentage) from those farmers adopting new technologies; 

(iv) An increase in the quality of the produce sold to agribusinesses through production alliances. 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
14. The proposed Agriculture Commercialization Project (ACP) seeks to enhance the competitiveness and 
sustainability of Lao PDR’s agriculture sector through technical and financial support to increase in agricultural productivity 
and commercialization in selected strategic value chains. The project would focus on: (i) the geographical areas with high 
agricultural development potentials; (ii) the farming systems with high potentials for commercialization (i.e. paddy, maize, 
vegetables); (iii) promotion of good agricultural practices and climate smart agricultural technologies and farming system 
diversification to enhance food and nutritional security; (iv) building capacity for farmers’ organisations, agribusinesses, 
public and private service providers; and (v) building on and developing synergies with other government/donor programs.  
 
15. Proposed project areas: In line with the above strategy, the project would select Provinces and Districts with: (i) 
high potentials for agricultural production (farm land and production volume); (ii) high potentials for commercialization 
and value chain development; (iii) availability of basic public infrastructure (i.e. irrigation, roads,  etc.); (iv) public services 
in place to support commercialization and diversification; and (v) availability of agribusinesses interested in inclusive value 
chain development. The list of target provinces is provisionally set as Vientiane capital, Vientiane province, Bolikhamxay, 
Khammouane, and Xayabury. The Provinces will be confirmed and districts will be identified before pre-appraisal mission. 
Three selected value chains could be initially selected for project preparation purposes – namely high value commercial 
rice (not subsistence), maize, and vegetables -- while allowing flexibility to add other, high-value crops during the life of 
the project. 

 
16. It is envisage that the Project would have three components: (A) Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems; (B) 
Support for Improved Value Chains; and (C) Project Management. 

17. Component A: Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems: This component would aim at enhancing productivity 
of farming systems and it would include the following activities:  

 
(i) Production organization and promotion of the use of good quality seeds;  
(ii) Research and extension to improve farming practices and farm machinery to promote good and 

sustainable agricultural production, diversification and commercialization;  

(iii) Upgrades of existing irrigation infrastructure and improvement of water management practices; 

(iv) Establishment and capacity building for farmer groups and their members; and  

(v) Mapping, demarcation, and registration of irrigation land/systems in the project area on a block basis (not 
for individual plots).  

 
18. Component B: Strengthening Agricultural Value Chains. This component would aim at strengthening and 
leveraging private sector investments in selected food value chains, and it would include the following activities:  
 

(i) Provision of matching grants to farmer groups and their members to promote investments in harvesting 
machines, drying and storage facilities to reduce pre/postharvest losses; 

(ii) Provision of matching grants and capacity building assistance to agribusinesses to strengthen their role in 
driving the value chain development; 

(iii) Upgrades of feeder access to production areas and farms;  

(iv) Training and consulting support to farmer groups and their members to build their management skills, 
business development and marketing of farm produce through adopting contract farming, value addition 
and product branding;  

(v) Support MAF, Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MOIC), their research institutes and technical agencies 
in conducting relevant market research, agricultural policy analyses, and improving intelligence and 
management skills; and  

(vi) Improving the enabling environment through strengthening capacity for quality control and standards 
certification (i.e. seeds, produce, mills, etc.) including improved inspection services, test kits and 
laboratory capacity to certify for clean and safe foods. 

 
19. Component C: Project Management. This component would provide equipment and incremental operating costs 
for project monitoring, financial management, and procurement activities, ensure compliance with the safeguards, 
support the short and long-term technical assistance to the project management team in selected areas, and support 
analysis and dissemination of findings related to the effectiveness and challenges associated with the different 
institutional and technical models being applied or piloted under the project.  
 
20. The project would establish and support linkages with ongoing and future interventions by other donors including 
ADB, IFC, NGOs, and government projects/programs. For instance, farmer groups and agribusinesses which received 
previous supports from the Netherlands Development Organization SNV’s Enhancing Milled Rice Production in Lao PDR 
(EMRIP) will be eligible for further support from this project in order to be more effective and efficient. The farmer groups 
and agribusinesses participating in this project would be well positioned to graduate and become potential clients of IFC 
in the future. This proposed project would seek to create complementary and enhance synergy of existing 
projects/programs in the areas. 


  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The list of target provinces is provisionally set as Vientiane capital, Vientiane province, Bolikhamxay, Khammouane, and 

Xayabury. The Provinces will be confirmed and districts within identified before pre-appraisal mission.   
 
Component A (Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems) would include production promotion of the use of good 

quality seeds, research and extension to improve farming practices and farm machinery to promote sustainable 
agricultural production, diversification and commercialization, upgrades of existing irrigation infrastructure and 
improvement of water management practices. Component B (Support for Improved Value Chains) would strengthen and 
leverage private sector investments in selected food chains. Component (Project Management) would support project 
management including monitoring and evaluation, financial management and procurement to ensure compliance with 
the fiduciary safeguards requirements. 
 
The project’s overall impacts are expected to be positive. Some negative impacts are envisaged to be limited, localized, 

manageable and reversible. It is anticipated that the following World Bank safeguard policies will be triggered: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and International Water Ways (for irrigation rehabilitation). At 
present, there is insufficient information to determined if Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Physical Culture Resources 
(OP/BP 4.11) are triggered, hence it is classed as TBD. Mapping, demarcation, and registration of irrigation land/systems 
are not expected to cause changes in land use types and land ownership as they will be carried out a block basis (not for 
individual plots). Forced child labor and labor influx are not anticipated from the project. The project would comply with 
the three gender tags proposed by the World Bank Standards. This is to ensure that the project will address gender in 
terms of (i) analysis; (ii) action; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation framework. During project preparation, the project will 
develop specific/tailored measures to enhance equal access/opportunities for women to benefit from the matching 
grants and other project activities. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The project will be executed though the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) with its provincial and district offices 

(PAFOS and DAFOs) in collaboration with Provincial Industry and Commerce Offices (PICOs) to be responsible for actual 
implementation of day-to-day activities. The capacity of MAF is assessed to be adequate as they had extensive experience 
in managing and implementing donor-funding projects, including those from the WBG namely Agriculture Development 
Project (ADP), 2004-2008, Rice Productivity Improvement Project (RPIP), 2009-2012 and Lao Upland Food Security 
Improvement Project (LUFSIP), 2010-2014. Some of PAFOs and DAFO staff had have previous experience with the World 
Bank-financed projects but some are new especially to safeguard policies. To mitigate residual risks, technical assistance 
will be recruited and in place to provide specific technical capacity for the implementing agencies involved in safeguard 
preparation and implementation. A staff from MAF and each of PAFOs and DAFOs will be appointed as focal points for 
safeguards. These safeguard focal staff will be responsible for impact assessment, consultation, and preparation of 
safeguard instruments, implementation and compliance monitoring and reporting with technical support from the 
consultants. Safeguard training and assistance will be also provided by the Bank safeguard specialists and the National 

University of Laos which delivers a safeguard training program supported through the ongoing Bank-financed Lao 
Environmental and Social Project II (LENSII). 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will finance irrigation and drainage 
refurbishment and upgrades and water management 
practices. Investments in harvested machines and 
storage and training, and equipment provision.  
 
The envisaged investments are typical to similar 
agriculture development projects and are not 
expected to have adverse and unprecedented 
environmental and social impacts. Implementation of 
irrigation and drainage infrastructure and land 
improvements investments on farmer fields under 
Component 1 are mainly rehabilitation by their nature 
and not expected to have significant negative 
environment and social impacts.  
 
Given that the scope and targets of the project are still 
to be determined during the project preparation, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) will be developed and applied by the project. 
ESMF will provide policy provisions, principles and 
process to address the environmental and social 
impacts. The policy framework will describe 
procedures for impact assessment, consultation, 
preparation of subsequent safeguard instruments and 
implementation arrangement. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 

It is expected that the project is only limited to areas 
of land already utilized for agriculture. NH will not 
likely be triggered as it is not anticipated at this stage. 
The project will have a ‘chance finds’ mechanism built 
into the ESMF to address the potential issues on NH. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

Forestry is not triggered as it is envisage that no 
project activities will take place on forest areas. The 
project would apply a screening process to eliminate 
subprojects which will impact on forests or involve 
forests in the early planning stage. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will develop a Pest Management Plan in 
line with Lao legal regulations and World Bank Policies 
on pesticide uses. A negative list of chemicals will form 
be included. The Pest Management Plan will be the 
part of the ESMF. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

The project may impact on physical cultural resources 
although it is expected to be limited to areas of land 
already utilized for agriculture. The project will have a 
‘chance finds’ mechanism built into the ESMF to 
address the potential issues on PCR. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Target beneficiaries and project areas will be identified 
during project preparation. It is likely that the project 
will operate in areas where there is a presence of 
ethnic groups, belonging to Mon-Khmer and Hmong- 
Hmong – lu Mien ethno-linguistic families, that meet 
the four characteristics specified as defining criteria 
for indigenous people in the World Bank Policy on 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP4.10). The project would 
conduct a Social Assessment to inform the preparation 
of the Ethnic Group Policy Framework (EGPF) to 
ensure that free, prior and informed consultations 
would be conducted with affected ethnic groups 
leading to their broad community support, and that 
they receive project benefits in a culturally 
appropriate manner. The EGPF will be prepared as a 
standalone document in line with OP 4.10 
requirements, and will be finalized before the project 
appraisal. 
 
Due attention will be given to ensure that ethnic 
groups do not suffer adverse impacts and that they 
receive culturally compatible social and economic 
benefits. Necessary steps and procedures will be 
included to ensure that the cultures of the multi-
ethnic society are respected and that gender 
dimension are integrated at all levels and cycles of 
project implementation. A feedback and grievance 
resolution mechanism will be developed and applied 
under the project to provide affected ethnic groups a 
legitimate platform for monitoring and reporting on 
the safeguard policy compliance as well as on project 
implementation. 
 
The project will provide training to its staff, 
consultants and their partners on the EGPF to ensure 
that they are aware of and able to comply the policy 

requirements. Details of due diligence procedures will 
be described in the EGPF. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Under Component A of the project: Enhancing 
Productivity of Farming Systems aiming at enhancing 
productivity of farming systems, minor land 
acquisition are envisaged from the rehabilitation of 
existing irrigation schemes. The civil works may 
involve expansion of intake, local reservoirs and 
irrigation canals.  These potential impacts can be 
avoided or minimized through proper design, impact 
assessment, consultation and application of mitigation 
measures. Given that the irrigation subprojects and 
areas to be covered are still unknown and to be 
identified during the project preparation, a 
Compensation and Resettlement Policy Framework 
(CRPF) will be developed and applied by the project 
which is in compliance with OP/BP 4.12 requirements.  
The CRPF will complement the EGPF and ESMF, 
especially in terms of implementation arrangements.  
If land or asset loss are unavoidable, the principles and 
procedures described in the RPF will be applied to 
address negative impacts.  Project staff, consultants 
and its partners will be provided with training and 
support to enable them to comply the policy 
requirements. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

Although the project does not plan to include 
construction/rehabilitation of dams, it may include 
small scale irrigations which use or rely on dams. The 
project will prepare safeguard documents to comply 
with OP/BP 4.37 requirements. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The policy is triggered as the proposed project 
investments are located in areas that are part of the 
Mekong River Basin. However, the project targets 
rehabilitation and improvements of existing irrigation 
systems and the rehabilitation works will not involve 
any adverse impacts on the quality and quantity of 
waters in the Mekong River. The team will prepare for 
a notification process for downstream riparian nation 
states. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be active in disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 31, 2017 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguard consultants will be recruited in April 2017. Draft safeguard documents will be available for review in June 

2017. Final safeguard documents will be available for disclosure in August 2017. 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Moldova Climate Adaptation Project (P155968) 

 
 

  
Feb 01, 2017 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Project Information Document/ 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 01-Dec-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC18811 

  BASIC INFORMATION 
     

  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Moldova P155968  Moldova Climate 
Adaptation Project 
(P155968) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Feb 21, 2017 May 04, 2017 Environment & Natural 
Resources 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency GEF Focal Area 

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Environment Land degradation 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Global Environment Facility (GEF)    2.00  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development   18.60  

International Development Association (IDA)    1.40  

Total Project Cost   22.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

  

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

Click here to enter text 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

Moldova is a landlocked country between Romania to the west and Ukraine to the north, east and south; the country 

has a surface area of 33,840 km2, and is home to 3.6 million people. Moldova’s rich soils and mild climate are ideal 

for farming, and agriculture has traditionally been a key sector in Moldova’s economic structure. The sector 

represented about 13 percent of Moldova GDP in 2014 with a value of about 14.5 billion MDL (about US$1.05 

billion). Agriculture employs nearly a third (28 percent) of the country’s population, and agro-food exports account for 

roughly 50 percent of the country’s total exports. In spite of its large size and significant contribution to the economy, 

the average agricultural sector growth rate performance has been low at 3.6 percent per annum over the last 10 years, 

mainly due to the sector’s vulnerability to the weather. 


In the context of overall economic growth, Moldova has made significant progress in reducing poverty and boosting 

shared prosperity. The economy was growing at 5 percent annually after 2000, and the national poverty rate (below $5 

per day) dropped from 68 to 11.4 percent between 2000 and 2014. Public and private transfers, namely pensions and 

remittances, as well as labor markets had an important role in reducing poverty. The Moldovan economy, however, 

moved into recession in 2015 (-0.5 percent growth in GDP) because of weaker external flows, large-scale banks fraud, 

and a drought. Economic troubles in Russia and Ukraine, together with Russia’s restrictions on agro-food imports from 

Moldova sharply reduced remittances from and halved Moldova’s exports to Russia. Further, a banking crisis brought 

on by massive fraud in three banks has lowered confidence in the banking sector, leading to significant interest rates 

and reduced credit to the private sector. The monetary and fiscal resolution of the three insolvent banks (12 percent of 

GDP) has led to higher public debt and lower foreign exchange reserves, damaged business confidence and reduced 

macroeconomic buffers to sustain economic shocks. 

 

Political instability became more marked between 2013 and 2015, manifesting itself as frequent changes of governing 

coalitions. There were seven prime ministers or acting prime ministers and three periods without a Government 

between September 2014 and January 2016. The November 2015 Public Opinion Barometer (bi-annual poll measuring 

political, social and economic sentiment) showed that 88 percent of Moldovans thought that the country was moving in 

the wrong direction. Corruption and governance indicators have also worsened markedly. Moldova fell from the 30th 

to the 20th percentile for Control of Corruption between 2012 and 2014 (2015 World Governance Indicators). The 

Business Environment and Enterprise Performance Survey shows a fourfold increase in the percentage of firms that 

rate the bribing of both officials and members of parliament during 2005-13 as negatively impacting the business 

environment. 

 

Moldova remains one of the poorest countries in Europe. Poverty is largely a rural phenomenon as rural national 

poverty stands at 19 percent compared to 5 percent for urban areas. With 57 percent of the population living in rural 

areas, 84 percent of the poor are concentrated there. Those in rural areas, poor and non-poor, rely more on agriculture 

and remittances for income sources than their urban counterparts who derive more income from non-agricultural 

employment. Therefore, rural areas felt the shock of the 2007 drought much more than urban areas, with poverty ($5 

per day) increasing from 31 percent in 2007 to a peak of 36 percent in 2009. Stocks of agricultural products vanished 

in many rural households, and prices and expenditure in households’ budgets for food and energy rapidly grew. A 

severe summer drought in 2015, along with lower remittances and higher inflation, has further pushed the poverty rate 

up to 41.9 percent. Climate change impacts, if not properly managed, could undermine progress made in poverty 

reduction, and adversely impact food security and economic growth in vulnerable rural areas.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Despite being landlocked and therefore having no exposure to sea-level rise, the ND-GAIN  methodology ranks 

Moldova as the most climate vulnerable country in Europe, based on a range of social and economic indicators. 

Temperature and rainfall have increased in Moldova over the last century. Climate models predict future mean 

temperature rises exceeding 20 by mid-century, and a slight increase or significant decline in precipitation, depending 

on region. Extreme climatic events and other climate-related challenges are expected to worsen in the future, with 

important implications for economic growth, and especially for the rural poor, who are more dependent on natural 

resources and more vulnerable to climate-related shocks. 

 

In 2014, the Government of Moldova, through the Ministry of Environment and with support of UNDP and the 



Government of Austria, developed and approved a National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, reviewing climate 

change vulnerabilities in the six sectors considered most vulnerable, agriculture, water resources, forestry, human 

health, energy and infrastructure. The strategy included an initial action plan to 2020, at an estimated budget of 

US$155 million, based on institutional and investment activities recommended within each sector. More recently, the 

Bank has supported the Government to carry out a more systematic analysis of the costs of inaction on within each of 

these sectors, and the potential volumes and cost-benefit of physical investments for climate adaptation. Given the 

importance of the sector, a parallel climate-smart agriculture profile was prepared through collaboration with CIAT. 

The studies identified key current investment needs in warning and response systems to extreme climate events, in 

resilient land management through improved agricultural practices and forestry, and in water resources management, 

and findings are summarized below (see annex 3 for more detail). 

 

Agriculture: For most crops, yields in Moldova are around a quarter to a third lower than other Eastern European 

countries. Only around 1% of land is irrigated, and droughts occur every few years, and results in estimated annualized 

costs of around $20 million. The most severe droughts, such as that of 2007, have significant impacts on GDP and 

food security. Crop losses are also incurred from flooding, late frosts, hail and windstorms. Climate change is expected 

to reduce the productivity of most current crops by 10-30%, as well as increasing the frequency and intensity of most 

extreme events, and presenting new pest and disease challenges. Annual crops will be more severely impacted than 

perennials, with typical conditions for fruit orchard and vineyards potentially even improving under climate change, 

but recent trends have seen an increase in annual cropping over perennials due to a lack of investment in rejuvenating 

orchards and vineyards when they reach the end of their productive lives. 

 

With rural finance only available at high interest rates, lack of investment is a general problem in the sector. Around 

43% of agricultural land and 80% of pasture land (which is mostly communally managed under local government 

authorities) is degraded to some degree, which makes the land even more vulnerable to climate variability and change. 

The productivity of pasture land has been estimated at 20-50% of its potential. The annual opportunity cost of inaction 

in the agriculture and livestock sectors is estimated to be around $240 - $480 million at present and to rise significantly 

over coming decades. Scaling up adoption of irrigation and a range of other climate-smart and sustainable agricultural 

technologies will be critical to the productivity and resilience of the sector. 

 

Forests: Moldova has the lowest forest cover in Europe at only 11.4 percent. Forests tend to occur in hilly areas with 

the majority of them located in the central part of Moldova, slightly less in the north and even fewer in the south. Tree 

species are mainly broad leafed - oak, ash, hornbeam, black locust and poplar being the most significant. Moldovan 

forests are already fragmented and stressed, and climate-related changes in species growth and composition are being 

observed. Climate change is expected to reduce the productivity of natural forests and change pathology patterns. 

Annual opportunity costs of inaction are estimated to be around $40 million, and to increase marginally over coming 

decades. Areas for immediate interventions are ecological reconstruction of the present forest estate and the expansion 

of forest vegetation, including the creation of new forest shelter belts, which play an important role in protecting crops 

from high winds, desiccation and uneven snow cover. 

 

Water Resources: Most of Moldovan territory lies between two main rivers (the Nistru and Prut) which originate 

outside its territory, but surface water resources are limited in much of the area in between. About 65 percent of the 

population use water abstracted from groundwater supplies. Utilization of water resources is already much lower than 

during Soviet times. Only around 6% of the previous area is currently under functional irrigation, and irrigation and 

potable water supply from ground water is a problem within many rural areas owing to decreased water level and its 

quality. Even with the potential for slightly increased rainfall in some areas, overall water availability is expected to 

decrease with climate change due to the combined changes in precipitation and temperature. Despite low levels of 

current use, total water availability is expected to fall below total demand within a couple of decades, as demand grows 

but supply falls, and Moldova is among countries predicted to have high water stress in 2040. The most populated and 

economically important regions are the most vulnerable to expected climate change, and some regions are already 

facing water shortages. Addressing deficits in these regions will be critical for supporting a sustainable economic 

recovery. The costs of water shortages could be measured in the hundreds of millions or billions of US$ by the 2040s, 

and investments in improving the efficiency of water usage and additional storage will be needed to avert them. The 

current project would make its contribution reducing water deficit for farmers by providing access to irrigation 

schemes, by promoting better and more adapted to climate changes agricultural practices, as well as by conducting 

large-scale information dissemination and demonstrational activities in this regard. 

 

Climate knowledge and emergency response: Moldova suffers from a range of natural disasters, most of which are 

weather related. Current annualized costs of flooding are estimated to be around $60 million, and to increase to several 

times that over coming decades as flood frequency and the volume of assets at risk increase. The World Bank has 

already invested in disaster response management through the Disaster and Climate Risk Management Project, 

DCRMP (2010-16; US$12 million), which is assessed to have had a significant effect on reducing economic losses. 

Nevertheless, recent hail and rain storms (June 2016) showed that the country is not as well prepared for natural 

hazards as it aims to be. In particular, and as recently highlighted by the Prime Minister, local delivery and translation 

of early warning to early action, as well as effective response, need further strengthening. This requires not only 

bolstering of sub-national command structures and facilities/equipment, but also ensuring that local first responders, 

authorities, public services and businesses are better prepared.  

 
Relationship to CPF 
 

The proposed project is fully consistent with and anticipated in the FY14-17 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) that 

was approved on August 9, 2013. Specifically, the project combines two operations anticipated in the CPS - on 

sustainable forest management and climate adaptation - contributing to the third pillar on “promoting a green, clean 

and resilient Moldova.” Through the proposed project, the Bank will support the country in identifying and 

implementing interventions for improved environmental practices and natural resource management, and greater 

adaptation to the impact of climate change. The project also aims at ensuring that poverty reduction and shared 

prosperity are delivered in an environmentally sustainable manner, while also reducing the vulnerability of rural 

households, which represent a disproportionately high share of the bottom 40 percent and largely rely on self-produced 

foods, to the vagaries of extreme weather events. As described in the CPS, the project will assist in improving under-

developed weather mitigation instruments as part of adaptation efforts, which leave the rural population, farmers in 

particular, highly vulnerable to adverse weather events, thus compromising their food supply. All these efforts are 

expected to support the Bank’s major emphasis on increasing resilience to climate related risks and disasters.  

 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)        
 
The PDO is to enhance adoption of climate-smart agriculture and forestry practices in targeted landscapes and 
strengthen national disaster management systems. 

 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 
- Area of agricultural land with increased productivity; 

- Number of farmers adopting new agricultural management practices promoted by the project; 

- Area of degraded land restored (of which forest, of which pasture); 

- Number/% of at risk population covered by effective early warning and response systems); 

- Direct beneficiaries (of which female, of which poor).  

 
D. Concept Description 

 
The emerging findings of the Climate Adaptation Technical Assistance show that there are substantial needs for (i) pro-

poor and complementary adaptation investments across a range of sustainable land and water management activities and 

(ii) cross-cutting climate information and emergency response. Accordingly, the Moldova Climate Adaptation & Forestry 

Project (CAFP) is proposed to focus on a mutually reinforcing set of investments that help to address several key 

adaptation issues and target the most vulnerable through: 

 

i. An integrated approach to supporting resilient rural landscapes through investments in on-farm irrigation and other 

adaptation activities, and forest-based restoration of degraded lands. 

 

ii. Strengthening of climate knowledge and disaster-risk management systems to improve understanding of climate 

impacts, and preparedness and response mechanisms, that will benefit a range of sectors. 

 

Project structure and key activities: 

 

Component 1: Resilient rural landscapes [$32 million indicative] 

 

Rural productivity in Moldova is lower than regional standards, and agriculture, livestock and forest systems are 

vulnerable to climate pressures. Only around 6% of the area covered by soviet-era schemes and less than 1% of 

Moldova’s arable land is under functional irrigation, and crops are vulnerable to flooding, late frosts, hail, windstorms and 

snow accumulations, as well as droughts. Many forests and pasture lands are degraded, and faced with intensifying 

climate-related threats such as fire and pests/disease. Particularly lands managed by local public authorities are degraded  

due to weak management capacity of the LPAs. Improving the management of these systems in unison is mutually 

reinforcing as it will support diversified rural incomes (thereby increasing resilience to individual climate shocks) as well 

as reducing vulnerability and increasing productivity through synergistic ecological services- e.g. the role that forests play 

in sheltering fields and protecting soil and water sources. 

 

The component would rely on investments in the following complementary activities within one or more target 

landscapes. 

 

Subcomponent 1.1: Support to the Agricultural Sector [$10 million indicative] 

 

The project would support the up-scaling of activities that have been previously tested through donor-supported pilot 

projects and have demonstrated successful mitigation and adaptation measures with potential for larger scale 

interventions. A number of resilience practices have been tested, generating locally-tuned models, farmer experience, and 

implementation-service delivery capacity has been created. stimulated emulation by the neighboring farmers. Discussions 

with producers confirm that these programs have been well-received and that there is a degree of emulation by 

neighboring farmers, but there is still considerable scope and need for upscaling. 

 

While on-going analysis indicates that access to irrigation represents the highest-return option for increased resilience of 

Moldovan agricultural production systems, the project will not focus on the rehabilitation of large-scale irrigation systems. 

These are not likely to be feasible in the context of the existing financing envelope for the project and current institutional 

constraints in the sector. Instead, the project would focus on building upon the results of the Millennium Challenge 

Corporation’s institutional and investment efforts in the rehabilitation of 10 large irrigation schemes, to provide further 

capacity building and/or investment resources to emerging water users associations/farmer groups for the sustainable use 

and expanded up-take of irrigation services. 

 

The project will provide financing for:   

 

a) Upscaling adoption of irrigation through assisting groups of farmers to access existing large-scale pumped systems 

rehabilitated by MCA, and by providing access to small-scale irrigation in the hinterlands through investments in shared 

equipment and infrastructure (e.g. rehabilitation of existing and construction of new water harvesting ponds). Both 

potential categories are likely to be located in the central and southern regions of the country. The potential ‘ready’ 

demand is assumed at around 15 percent of the potentially equipped irrigated area i.e., 30 000 hectares @ 15% = 4500 

hectares. The irrigated areas are used mostly for high value vegetable crops (tomato; cucumbers; onions; peppers; 
eggplants, etc.) and orchards. Based on the previous experience in the country the proposed activities do not 

cause any risks and impacts related to child and forced labor. 
 

b) Upscaling demonstration activities on climate smart agriculture technologies: i.e. integrated climate resilient practices 

and investments such as drip irrigation, greenhouses, minimum and no-till agriculture, UV/hail nets, etc. The project 

would aim to support around 100 producers, leading to at least 200 demonstration events and to around 3000 knowledge 

beneficiaries. 

 

c) Extension and knowledge dissemination on lower-cost on-farm adaptation practices: multi-cropping, inter-cropping, 

silage, climate smart herd management, introduction to organic farming, etc. The project would aim to support 

compilation of existing knowledge into publications and practical guidelines, with more on-hands delivery of knowledge 

to around 1000 farmers in dedicated workshops. 

 

The project would support the upscaling investments mentioned in (a) and (b) above with matching grant financing. 

Matching grants would not exceed 30% of the overall cost for any particular climate smart investment, as well as be under 

US$50,000, and would be provided on a competitive basis (in transparently held calls of proposals), against clearly 

established eligibility and performance implementation criteria, including a public good element, such as associative 

collaboration between farmers and/or a public demonstration element. Demonstration investments will be subject to 

commitments for inclusion in a demonstration plot circuit and allowing access by agri-consultants and interested farmers. 

 

Support for these activities is likely to be delivered to local communities and farmers through the country’s National Rural 

Development Agency (ACSA) for the proliferation of climate smart agriculture practices and technologies (through 

demonstration plots, farmer schools and climate-informed extension), and through the involvement of ACSA and of the 

Millennium Challenge Account Unit for irrigation activities. The spatial focus of these interventions, given the relatively 

uniform levels of vulnerability of agricultural production systems throughout the country, is likely to be widespread and 

responsive to local demand and proactivity, but the menu of interventions would be fine-tuned to local agro-climatic 

conditions. 

 

Subcomponent 1.2: Forest and pasture management [indicative US$22 million indicative] 

 

In forest and pasture land management, project activities will aim at supporting ecological reconstruction, new forest belts 

and riparian buffers and restoration of degraded land. The precise selection of activities will be conditioned on progress on 

institutional restructuring in the forest sector. 


Specific activities are in line with national forestry plans and could include: 

 

Institutional strengthening ($0.5 million) to support the implementation of the Forest Institutional Reform Strategy of 

Moldova (FIRSM, prepared in 2012 with support from ENPI-FLEG I program) through building capacity (equipment, 

enhancing professional and institutional capacity, etc.). 

 

Ecological reconstruction and improving the genetic diversity of state forests ($12 million) are high priorities. The aim is 

to consolidate existing forest resources by focusing mainly on the Central region where most forests are concentrated and 

to a lesser extent in the South. The project would support ecological reconstruction in an area of 5,000 to 10,000 ha 

depending on the intensity of presumed intervention ($9.5 million).This includes investments in the forest agency 

Moldsilva’s afforestation capacity along with financing forest reconstruction activities such as sanitary cuttings and 

selective cutting/clearing of nonnative species, as well as afforestation activities. For all areas proposed for ecological 

reconstruction a specialized design institute/agency will design a concrete scheme for such activities which will be 

preliminary reviewed and approved by the State Ecological Inspectorate in order to avoid any potential impacts on critical 

or important natural habitats with high biodiversity values. This will be done during the initial stage of project 

implementation and before contracting implementing agencies for these activities. 

 

Provision of appropriate seeds and seedlings material to support regeneration of native forests (mainly comprising oak 

species) would be addressed by investment in the National Centre for Forest Genetics and Seeds (NCFGS) under 

Moldsilva. Native seedling production would be enhanced through investments in irrigation and capacity for containerized 

seedlings production at the NCFGS ($2.5 million). Knowledge gaps in ecological reconstruction of forests would be 

addressed through a training program on the ecological reconstruction for the Moldsilva staff ($0.25 million). 

 

Agricultural shelterbelts, riparian buffers and afforestation on Local Public Authorities’ land ($6.5 million). This would 

include reconstruction of degraded shelterbelts on 1,000 ha ($0.75 million), creation of new forest belts on 1,000 ha ($1.5 

million) and riparian buffers on 1,000 ha ($1.5 million), as well as afforestation of around 1,500 ha of degraded land ($3.0 

million). These interventions would mainly target land owned by Local Public Authorities (LPAs). 

 

Improved management of LPA forests and pastures ($4 million) would increase the capacity of LPAs for managing 

communal land resources (mainly forests and pastures) in a participatory, planned and integrated way. This will support 

management planning for all forests that belong to LPAs but which do not have management plans yet (appr. 40,000 ha). 

The project would also support rehabilitation of degraded communal land, through improved pasture (and livestock) 

management, and silvo-pastoral approaches. 

 

Feasibility of activities on state lands currently managed by Moldsilva depend on if and when the FIRSM is implemented. 

The reforms are expected to be launched in fall 2016. If, however, they are delayed, more project resources will be 

allocated to management of locally administered lands. This alternative allocation of investments is represented in the 

table below. 

 

Private landowners have not yet been active in re/afforestation or production of e.g. for wood energy. This is due to 

fragmentation of private land ownership (average private property is about 1.2 ha) and due to very few degraded lands 

being privately owned. If feasible, the project may look at options (e.g. incentives or extension services) to promote wood 

production on private lands. 

 

Component 2: Disaster preparedness [$15 million indicative] Strengthened disaster management systems are needed to 

support a wide range of sectors with risk management planning and response to extreme hydrometeorological events. The 

Emergency Situations and Civil Protection Service (ESCPS) of the Minister of Internal Affairs has identified three 

priority investment areas that the project will seek to support, building on advances achieved during the DCRMP: 

 
(i) Establishment of two regional Emergency Command Centers. The DCRMP successfully established a modern national 

Emergency Command Center (ECC) in Chisinau. DCRMP’s scoping and feasibility studies indicated that to deliver 

effective management of emergency situations and preparedness across the country, two regional ECCs are also needed in 

the north and south of the country, in Balti and Cahul respectively. The project will therefore complete the national 

integrated risk management technical strategy by establishing the two regional ECCs. This will ensure better quality of 

services nationally at the local level, improve efficiency of support for remote locations, better support tactical field 

operations, and increase redundancy for critical ESCPS infrastructure. Cost is estimated at US$4 million, to be 

implemented over 5 years. 

 

(ii) Improving preparedness and emergency response capacity. Much of the equipment that ESCPS deploys to respond to 

climate and disaster emergencies is outdated and inefficient. For example, 90% of fire response equipment, which is used 

to manage both property and wildfires, is over 20 years old. Older equipment is also not compliant with modern 

environmental management approaches, often leading to negative environmental impacts during deployment. The project 

will therefore improve ESCPS’ preparedness and response capacity through investments in modern equipment, including 

but not limited to fire and rescue vehicles, extreme winter conditions access capacity, temporary flood management 

modules, electricity and heat generation, and equipment to support preparedness activities during non-crisis times. Base 

cost is estimated at US$3 million to be implemented over 3 years, scalable depending on financing availability. 

 

(iii) Establishment of a national training center. Currently Moldova does not have a national training center properly 

equipped for capacity building in theoretical and practical management of emergency situations. This prevents the state 

institutions, local public institutions of level I and II, the private sector and the public to effectively understand and 

manage disaster risk. Such a national training center would help ensure state and public preparedness for disaster and 

climate risks, improving risk management and awareness. The project will establish an ESCPS national training center, 

equipped for capacity building in both theoretical disaster risk management and practical training through simulations of 

emergency situations. The center will train ESCPS staff and first responders, as well as local leaders/authorities, managers 

of critical infrastructure (hospitals, schools, etc.), private sector leaders and the public. A location has already been 

identified and secured, with the cost estimated at US$5 million to be implemented over 5 years. 

 

Component 3: Providing immediate response to an eligible crisis or emergency as needed. A zero-budget contingent 

emergency response component (CERC) will enable funds to be rapidly reallocated to disaster response in the event of an 

eligible climate-related incident during the lifetime of the project. A crisis or emergency is defined for CERC eligibility in 

the same way as it is defined in World Bank OP/BP 10.00: an event that has caused or is likely to imminently cause a 

major adverse economic and/or social impact associated with crises or disasters due, in the case of this project, to 

hydrometeorological hazards. While the World Bank provides the Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) to consolidate 

CERCs across national IDA projects for potentially larger multi-sectoral response financing, the preference is currently 

for a standalone CERC limited to funds under this project. Global experience has shown that standalone CERCs are more 

flexible and quicker to trigger ex-post. An IRM would require restructuring of existing projects to add CERCs to them. 

The Republic of Moldova would need to adopt a CERC Operations Manuals (OM), describing the actions to be taken 

when a crisis or emergency occurs, as well as the monitoring, evaluation and reporting arrangements of the emergency 

response. 

 

Component 4: Project coordination and management [$3.5 million indicative] 

This component will support knowledge and project monitoring systems, as well as overall project administration, 

including coordination across implementing agencies. As a member of the Intergovernmental Board on Climate Services 

(IBCS), Moldova has endorsed the Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS). The GFCS strives to develop and 

incorporate science-based climate information and prediction into planning, policy and practice through close partnership 

between providers and users of climate information. The GFCS Partner Advisory Committee (PAC) has identified 

Moldova as one of six pilot countries. While through separate mechanisms the Bank and other development partners aim 

to support overall pursuit of GFCS at the national level, the project will provide technical assistance to strengthen the 


production and use of climate information as a tool for coordination and management within certain sectors: 

 

(i) Climate information services. The State Hydrometeorological Service (SHS) carries a national mandate to deliver 

information services specifically on weather, climate and water hazards. However considering complementary ongoing 

and planned support from the Bank and other development partners, the project will not directly invest in SHS. The 

project will provide technical assistance to support future climate investment, including: 

 

a. Supporting institutional reform processes (including vision, strategy, restructuring, etc) of Apele Moldovei (or any 

successor water resources management agency), informed by modelling of climate-related water resources challenges and 

investment needs, and analysis of constraints to irrigation development, for example land fragmentation and markets, rural 

finance, drought compensation, moral hazard and crop insurance. Costing approximately US$1 million, this will lay the 

basis for potential future irrigation (and storage) investments. (including potentially as a basis for discussion of future 

World Bank financing). 

 

b. Facility/challenge fund for additional analytical/modelling work on climate impacts, for example health effects, 

analysis of crop potentials, etc., estimated to cost US$1 million. 

 

(ii) Overall project administration. Includes coordination across implementing agencies and project monitoring systems, 

expected to cost approximately US$1.5 million. 

 
 

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)       

 
While the project activities will be implemented country wide, the main focus of the sub-component 1.a and 1.b will be 
implemented in the most vulnerable Southern part of the country which is one of the most affected by climatic 
changes region. The proposed activities would not generate any significant environmental and social risks as no major 
civil works or large scale ecological reconstruction activities in the forests will be supported. Some adverse 
environmental impacts might occur during afforestation activities which might affect the biological diversity and 
existing natural habitats, as well as some environmental risks and issues related to construction of the regional 
Emergency Command Centers and of the Emergency Training Center (solid waste management; air and water 
pollution; labor safety). 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies       

 
The project activities will be coordinated by an inter-ministerial steering committee chaired by the State Minister. The 
Ministries of Environment (MoE), and of Agriculture and Water Resources, Moldsilva, State Hydro-meteorological 
Service, and Department of Emergency Situations will be part of the steering committee, and will be implementing the 
some components of the project. 
 
Fiduciary arrangements, incl. safeguards, will be managed by the Project Management Team (PMT) in MoE. The PMT 
supported implementation of the Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs), and is currently supporting implementation of 
the Disaster and Climate Risk Management Project. These projects have financed, to a large extent, similar activities as 
the proposed project, in particular agricultural climate adaptation. The PMT staff has substantial experience in 
implementing environmental and social safeguards and the PMT EA capacity have been qualified as satisfactory. In the 

last AMs for the Disaster and Climate Risk Project the project environmental management is satisfactory. Civil works 
were in compliance with the EMP and EMP Checklists for hydro-meteorological stations and for Department for 
Emergency Situations Command Center. The PIU has integrated environmental clauses in the bidding and contract 
documents. The EMP environmental requirements are followed and there were no complaints from the HS and DESCP, 
or supervising Engineers. All construction and refurbishing activities are reported as being consistent with national 
environmental and construction requirements and permits. Under the pilot activities for the consolidation of the 
agricultural sector’s resilience to adverse weather effects the PIU has assessed from environmental point of view all 
selected grants and checked if they have relevant environmental permits and authorization, including approvals from 
environmental inspectorate.  It is expected the matching grant program of the Project will be implemented via Agency 
for Interventions and Payments in Agriculture (AIPA)  which has also experience in conducting environmental screening 
and assessment of the grants. Analysis of AIPA’s EA capacities and if needed, capacity building activities, will be done 
during the project design phase. 
 
For the project implementation the PMT will hire safeguards specialist responsible for both environmental and social 
safeguards; if needed, WB Environmental Specialist will provide adequate on the job training. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team       

 
Arcadii Capcelea, Mohamed Ghani Razaak 

 
D. Policies that might apply       

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project activities (production of forest 
reproductive material for climate resilience; 
ecological reconstruction of priority degraded forests; 
rehabilitation and establishment of shelter belts to 
protect fields and riparian buffers to protect water 
bodies; afforestation of degraded land; community-
based pasture management; matching grant facility 
which would support investments in drainage of 
waterlogged areas, in irrigation infrastructure 
rehabilitation and modernization, in on-farm water-
harvesting structures and efficient small-scale 
irrigation, anti-hail net systems, agroforestry, soil and 
water conservation techniques; improving emergency 
prevention and preparedness training by constructing 
a training and/or two regional Emergency Command 
Centers; etc.) might generate a series of various 
environmental and social impacts related to the 
following: (a) biodiversity degradation; (b) increased 
pollution of ground and surface waters due to soil 
erosion; (c) health and environmental risks due to 
inappropriate pesticides handling; and (d) noise, dust, 
Air and water pollution, health hazards and labor 
safety issues during the civil works; etc. The 
anticipated social impacts of such activities include 
issues around (a) labor and working conditions, (b) 
information disclosure and stakeholder engagement, 
(c) community health and safety, (d) land acquisition, 
physical and economic displacement, lost access to 
natural resources. All of identified adverse impacts 
are expected to be typical for afforestation, 
agricultural production and irrigation activities as well 
as for small scale construction/rehabilitation works, 
temporary by nature and site specific and can be 
easily mitigated by applying best agro-forestry and 
construction practices or relevant mitigation 
measures.  
To address these impacts the client will prepare an 
Environmental and Social Assessment Framework 
which will guide the project activities and matching 
grants EA once identified. The ESMF would be 
targeted at specifying the set of mitigation, 
monitoring measures, timeframes and institutional 
responsibility measures to be taken during the 
project activities and matching grants to eliminate 
adverse environmental and social impacts, offset, or 
reduce them to acceptable levels. The documents 
should cover the following: rules and procedures for 
environmental screening; guidance for conducting 
activities/matching grants EIA and/or preparing 
simple EMPs as well as the EMP Checklist; possible 
mitigation measures for different proposed activities 
and matching grants to be supported by the project; 
requirements for monitoring and supervision of 
implementing of EIA/EMPs requirements. The ESMF 
will also provide a brief assessment of the associated 
to the project recently rehabilitated under the US 
“Compact Program” large irrigation pumping stations 
and schemes, in particular in terms of their 
compliance with the WB OPs. The project will require 
a framework for public consultation and information 
disclosure identifying all relevant, affected and 
interested stakeholders and will develop inclusive 
and meaningful ways of their involvement in the 
project design and implementation. This Public 
Consultation and Information Disclosure Plan or 
Stakeholder Engagement Plan will contain a section 
planning for continuous engagement, outreach to 


communities and stakeholder and information 
disclosure with respect to the project timelines and 
implementation. The PCID or SEP will be designed to 
reach out for both male and female audiences and 
provide opportunities for them to voice their opinion, 
concerns or comments about the project and its 
implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 

At this stage of project design it is not known if this 
OP will be triggered. The NHs might be triggered first 
of all in the case of implementing ecological 
reconstruction activities. If the project will support 
such activities then the ESMF will provide detailed 
guidance for EA of such activities and areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

While the project will not support any commercial 
wood harvesting this OP is triggered as the project 
will support afforestation activities along with the 
forest reconstruction activities in the degraded 
forests.  In order to make sure the project activities 
will not affect natural habitats and biodiversity 
conservation the ESMF will specify the rules and 
procedure for environmental screening and 
assessment of land plots given for afforestation or for 
creating forest shelterbelts as well as of the degraded 
forests selected for reconstruction activities. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

While the project will not finance purchasing and/or 
application of pesticides, it might support purchasing 
special equipment and would provide training on pest 
management in the forestry sector and thus the 
project triggers this OP. To address these issues the 
ESMF will include measures to raise awareness and 
educate foresters regarding safe pesticide handling 
and use of Integrated Pest Management to enhance 
sustainability and reduce human and environmental 
exposure to pesticides. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
The project will be implemented on agricultural lands 
and in forest areas and will not generate impacts on 
PCRs. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No N/A for Moldova 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is also 
triggered. Although it is expected all 
activities/subproject will be implemented on public 
lands, in some cases the proposed activities might 
affect private households or restrict access of the 
local population to the afforested lands or to 
pastures to be improved. To address the involuntary 
resettlement issues including impacts on livelihoods 



on protected lands, and   restriction to access to 
natural resources, the client will prepare separate 
Resettlement Policy Framework that also includes a 
Process Framework.  For that the client will conduct a 
Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and a Gender 
Assessment that, based on what will be designed the 
RPF. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No N/A 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The proposed upscaling irrigation through assisting 
groups of farmers to access existing large-scale 
pumped systems rehabilitated by MCA, and by 
providing access to small-scale irrigation in the 
hinterlands through investments in shared 
equipment and infrastructure (e.g. rehabilitation of 
existing and construction of new water harvesting 
ponds) will not change the volume of 
extraction/discharge water or quality of water of the 
Prut and Dniester Rivers (which are international 
rivers) and its tributaries, but rather will lead to more 
efficient irrigation and drainage. Based on that the 
project team will seek a waiver from VP on not 
required notification of riparian parties. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No N/A 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan        

 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Moldova Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (P156963) 

 
 

  
April 17, 2018 Page 1 of 5  

     

 

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

Program Information Document  
 (PID) 

 
 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 17-Apr-2018 | Report No: 125879 

 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Moldova P156963 
Moldova Economic 
Governance Development 
Policy Operation 

 

Region 
Estimated Board Date 
 

Practice Area (Lead)(s) Financing Instrument 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA June 19, 2018  
Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Moldova Ministry of Finance 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

The proposed EGDPO supports ongoing reforms to enhance the transparency and sustainability of the public sector and 
to level the playing field for private sector development. They enjoy coordinated support from the EC, the IMF and the 
World Bank, including by targeted technical assistance.  

  
 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 30 million 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 

  
Source: IDA 
 

 
Decision 
 

Following the Corporate Review, the decision was taken to proceed with appraisal and negotiations. 
   
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context  
 
Moldova’s recent macro-economic performance has been characterized by consumption-led growth and low fiscal 



deficits. In 2016-17, GDP growth resumed reaching 4.5 percent on account of strong agricultural output and robust 
private consumption growth largely driven by remittances and public and private wage increases. At the same time, 
credit growth remains negative reflecting the limited pass-through of the monetary policy stance to commercial 
interest rates and tighter prudential standards in the banking sector.  The fiscal deficit is estimated to reach 0.8 
percent in 2017, lower than the deficit forecasted at budget stage and public debt remains sustainable under 
different stress-test scenarios. In 2018, growth is expected to remain robust and reach 3.8 percent but to moderate 
over the medium term. The inflation rate is expected to re-enter the target corridor due to base effects and lower 
regulated prices. Fiscal deficits are projected to remain under control.  
 
In a context of slowing growth over the medium term, addressing the structural impediments to efficient public and 
private sector governance is paramount for igniting new sources of growth. As a large share of the population is 
already living and working abroad, and the attachment of subsequent-generation migrants to Moldova declines along 
time, Moldova needs to search for new drivers of growth reliant on higher private sector investments and in this 
context, remove barriers to private sector access to and use of resources. Moreover, governance challenges undermine 
the efficiency of public resource use and constrain competition among businesses.  

 
 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

In line with the World Bank FY18-21 Country Partnership Framework and the Moldova National Development 
Strategy, the proposed Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (EGDPO) supports Moldova’s transition 
towards a more sustainable and inclusive growth model. It builds on the progress achieved under the previous DPO by 
supporting actions to enhance the transparency of the banking sector and recent analytical work, which identifies 
strengthening the rule of law and the accountability of economic institutions as one of the top three constraints that are 
holding back economic growth and prosperity in the country.  
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 

This operation supports reforms to strengthen economic governance in Moldova linked to the management of fiscal 

risks (Pillar A) and private sector development (Pillar B).  

D. Program Description   
 

This stand-alone Economic Governance Development Policy Operation (EGDPO) supports reforms to reduced fiscal risks 

and level the playing field for private sector development. The authorities are committed to restore investors’ and 

citizen’s trust in the integrity of the public sector by developing transparent and stable economic institutions and 

improving equity in access and use of resources. Reforms under the first pillar focus on reducing fiscal risks by reforming 

the pensions system, strengthening tax collection form tobacco taxation, pre-empting potential conflicts of interest of 

high level officials, and improving the reliability of SOEs and municipal enterprises’ financial information.    Reforms under 

the second pillar aim at removing bottlenecks in obtaining licenses, authorizations, and certificates and in accessing key 

agriculture inputs (seeds, seedlings, fertilizers, and pesticides), and at improving the governance regime in the banking 

and energy sector.  

 


E. Implementation  
 

The Ministry of Finance will steer the administration of this operation, as the main body responsible for financial aid 

coordination and management. The Ministry of Finance has recently assumed this role and will be responsible for the 

supervision for the monitoring of progress in the policy areas supported by the operation.  

 
F.  Poverty and Social Impacts and Environment Aspects 
 

The operation is not expected to have adverse impacts along poverty, social, gender or environmental dimensions. 
Some of prior actions could have positive impacts on poverty and equity. The pension and tax related reforms promote 
social sustainability, reduce privileges that do not benefit large segments of population, especially poor, and incentivize 
healthier lifestyle. The pension reform and higher tobacco taxation contribute to the reduction of gender gaps in income 
and non-communicable diseases.  
 
G.  Risks and Mitigation 
 
Risks to the program implementation are moderate to substantial. Macro, sector strategies and technical design risks 
are considered substantial and are partially mitigated by the reforms supported by this operation, the recent record of 
Moldova’s prudent fiscal policy, the IMF program which serves as a macro-fiscal stability anchor, and the technical 
assistance (TA) provided by the World Bank Group (WBG) which will help continue the reform agenda. 

 . 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Montenegro Second Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening Project (P164424) 

 
 

  
Nov 15, 2017 Page 1 of 18  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 20-Nov-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA23780 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Montenegro P164424 Montenegro Second 
Institutional Development 
and Agriculture 
Strengthening Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 17-Nov-2017 30-Jan-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the competitiveness of agriculture and fisheries in Montenegro 
through enhanced delivery of government support in alignment with EU accession requirements. 
 
Components 

Strengthening MARD agriculture, rural development and fisheries program 
Support for the Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Services 
Modernization of the Fisheries Sector 
Project Management 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development   34.89  

Total Project Cost   34.89  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 



Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Montenegro, a small, upper middle-income country, gained its independence in 2006 and is making big strides 
towards negotiating its accession to the European Union (EU). With a population of only 0.6 million, and a 
Gross National Income (GNI) per capita of US$7,320, Montenegro is the smallest country in the Western 
Balkans. It started negotiations with the EU in June 2012 and strives to join by 2020 ahead of the other countries 
in the Western Balkans. Of the 35 negotiations chapters, three have been provisionally closed and twenty-four 
have been opened. Good progress towards EU alignment has been made in areas such as free movements of 
goods, agriculture and rural development, food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy, energy, employment 
and social policy, regional policy and preparation for structural instruments. In the latest Progress Report on 
Montenegro (November 2016), the European Commission (EC) notes that the country is at early stages of 
preparation regarding budgetary and financial provisions, environment and climate change, and more needs to 
be done to improve competitiveness, as well as economic and monetary policy. Strengthening the 
administrative capacity for ensuring the application of the acquis communautaire remains a substantial 
challenge for Montenegro. 

 

Montenegro has followed a steady path of economic growth, but not without challenges. The economic boom, 
from 2000 to 2008, was triggered by a large inflow of capital that stimulated aggregate demand, led to a steady 
increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth, and a fall in the unemployment rate. During the boom, there 
was a steady decline in the percentage of households below the poverty line and an increase in the income of 
households in the bottom 40 percent, most of them in rural areas. After experiencing a double-dip recession due 
to the 2008 global financial and the 2012 Eurozone debt crises, Montenegro’s economy slowed down to 1.8 
percent in 2014 and recovered to 2.5 percent in 2016, continuing its recovery path (with 3.2 percent in 2017) 
due to investments in road infrastructure and robust tourism activity. However, the unemployment rate remains 
high at 17.3 percent in early 2017. Large fiscal deficit and growing fiscal debt have prompted the Government of 
Montenegro to adopt a set of fiscal consolidation measures aimed at reducing public spending.   

 

Montenegro’s overarching development goal is to achieve smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. Montenegro’s 
development plan is outlined in three separate, but complimentary strategies: the EU Accession Program 2014-2018, 
the Montenegro Development Directions (MDD) 2015-2018, and the Montenegro Economic Reform Program (ERP) 
2016-2018. Montenegro’s EU Accession Program was adopted in December 2013 and represents the main strategic 
document regarding European integration. It focuses on measures required for completing alignment with the acquis 
communautaire. The MDD, aligned with the Europe 2020 strategy, was adopted by the Government in July 2015. The 
MDD identifies four driving sectors, namely tourism, energy, agriculture and rural development, and manufacturing, 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. Please delete this note when 

finalizing the document. 

 


towards achieving the objective of “smart, sustainable and inclusive growth.” The ERP complements these efforts by 
tightening fiscal spending and reducing public debt. 
 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Agriculture is an important sector for the economic development of Montenegro. In this predominantly 
mountainous country, agricultural land represents 38 percent of total land area, two thirds of which is covered 
by pastures. Agriculture and food production play an important role in the economy, contributing 12 percent of 
GDP (with the primary sector contributing 10 percent, and agro-food processing and fisheries contributing 
around two percent). With agricultural exports increasing by around four percent annually during the last eight 
years, agricultural imports have been increasing much faster (around 16 percent annually) leading to the 
worsening of agricultural trade deficit from US$166 million in 2005 to quadrupling by 2014.  

 

Agriculture contributes to income and job creation, but much of it is not accounted for. Agriculture is the 
largest economic activity in rural Montenegro; close to 50,000 families (roughly a quarter of the country’s 
population), with an average holding of 4.5 hectares, derive their income partly or entirely from agriculture. 
Despite its small size, the agro-climate and landscape varies dramatically from the north to the south and coastal 
areas of Montenegro. Olive and citrus fruit production dominate in the coastal region; early vegetable 
production and vineyards - in the center and in proximity of the larger agglomerations of Nikšić and Podgorica; 
and, extensive livestock production - in the north. According to MONSTAT, in 2010 there were 2,347 people 
formally employed in agriculture. Yet according to the 2010 Agricultural Census, the equivalent of 46,473 Annual 
Work Units were employed in agriculture, suggesting that only around five percent of agricultural employment is 
formal.  

 

Montenegro agriculture is characterized by constraints similar to those that prevail in Southeast Europe. 
Among them: (i) inability of agricultural producers to adopt modern technologies due to limited access to 
finance; (ii) small average farm size and an incomplete land use planning; (iii) slow uptake in development of 
aggregators that could improve collecting, storage, packaging and marketing of produce; and (iv) the effects of 
climate change, especially increased weather-related natural disasters such as droughts and floods that have a 
major negative impact on productivity, water supply and land erosion. 

 

With an extensive coastline, the fisheries sector of Montenegro has an enormous potential that has not yet 
been capitalized on. The fisheries sector has not yet developed to its full potential. According to recent stock 
assessments, marine living resources are currently under-exploited by the domestic fleet, which could safely 
increase in size. Today Montenegro is a net importer of fish products. In 2014, for example, 3,316 tons of 
fisheries products were imported into Montenegro, of which 2,000 tons of fresh, frozen and fileted products, 
whereas a mere 11 tons of fisheries products were exported. With current marine catch estimated at around 
900 tons a year, Montenegro has the potential to substantially increase its production to meet domestic 
demand (leading to an ultimate phase-out of imports), a large share of which will be absorbed by the growing 
tourism sector. The capacity of the fisheries sector, however, is currently constrained by outdated equipment, 
lack of adequate infrastructure (landing sites and dedicated access in existing ports) and an underdeveloped 
value chain.   

 

The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) has a cross-cutting mandate that covers not only 
agriculture, rural development, and the food system, but also encompasses water, forestry and fisheries. 



While the focus of the past 10 years has primarily been on agricultural production and to a lesser extent on food 
safety, the Ministry recognizes the need to strengthen the performance of other sub-sectors, i.e. food safety and 
fisheries, for which little policy orientation or support has been provided. The MARD has recently taken 
important steps to address this matter by adopting legislation that provides a new framework for food safety 
and establishes the Administration for Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Affairs (AFSVPA). Further, it 
has functionally separated the Directorate for Agriculture and Fisheries into two Directorates to focus on 
supporting each sub-sector individually.  

 

Agriculture is an important sector in the EU accession agenda of Montenegro. Montenegro has made 
significant progress in establishing the required institutions and systems, and has developed capacity to 
implement the EU Instrument for Pre-Accession and Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD). However, 
further work is required as the country has committed to align its national agricultural policy to the Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP) of the EU by the date of accession. To this end, the country is required to have all the 
necessary systems in place in order to manage and receive funding from the EU and to make payments to 
Montenegrin beneficiaries in accordance with EU rules and procedures. An Integrated Administration and 
Control System (IACS), along with other tools, are necessary for the efficient utilization and monitoring of 
support funds, and for the harmonization of the national direct payment measures with those currently 
implemented in the EU. EU membership brings important benefits to the country both at the macro and micro 
levels. It has been found to increase GDP per capita by approximately 12 percent. Trade liberalization has 
increased the flow of goods and services and has put competitiveness at the forefront of market integration. In 
agriculture, EU membership unlocks significant assistance and direct payments to farmers under the EU’s CAP, 
yet it also imposes stricter food safety and other trade-related requirements to agricultural production. 
 

Montenegro is making good progress towards alignment to EU food safety legislation.  A number of rulebooks, 
decrees and bylaws have been adopted. A new AFSVPA has been established under the oversight of the MARD, 
which also incorporates inspection services that previously operated autonomously. Several advances have been 
made in veterinary policy. The Animal Identification and Registration system, which already included large and 
small ruminants, was extended to pigs, and it has been completed. The multiannual program for the eradication 
of rabies has continued and routine monitoring and testing of ruminants for transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies (TSEs) are being introduced. The implementing legislation on food safety rules was adopted in 
various fields but enforcement remains a challenge mainly due to shortage of human and material resources. As 
the country moves towards EU accession, the MARD would need to continue improving its administrative 
capacity, in particular for inspection services and laboratories, as well as upgrading food safety establishments. 

 

Montenegro’s preparations for the fisheries sector are at an early stage, but important progress has been 
made. The country’s Fisheries Strategy of 2015-2020 provides an overall guidance for the development of the 
Montenegrin sector and its administration in line with the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), including steps 
required to fully align and harmonize the national fisheries policy with the EU acquis communautaire. Steps 
must be taken to inform fishermen, traders and processors about the requirements they will face prior to and 
upon accession of Montenegro to the EU. The strategy identifies some of the sub-sector’s key areas for potential 
growth, including improved resource exploitation and connecting production from capture fisheries to the 
tourism sector and processing, thus ultimately increasing the added value of fish products. To reach this 
potential, adequate support will be required to increase fisheries production – including number of boats, 
improvement of fisheries coastal infrastructure, and enhancement of the control and surveillance system to 
address illegal, unregulated and unreported (IUU) fishing. It is important to note that after EU accession, 


production capacity will be capped because of overall EU policy for the preservation of marine living resources. 
As a new EU member, Montenegro’s vessel capacity will be frozen as to the date of entry, without possibility of 
future expansion of the fleet.  

 

Since the early stages of Montenegro’s EU accession process, the EC and the World Bank (WB) have closely 
coordinated their activities to support Montenegro’s authorities and the agricultural sector towards unlocking 
access to the IPARD. Funded by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the 
Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Montenegro Institutional Development and Agriculture Strengthening 
Project (MIDAS) was launched in July 2009

1
 and has made important contributions to compliance with the IPARD 

requirements. The country’s authorities have put considerable efforts into setting up the required legal and 
institutional framework to meet EU pre-accession requirements. To this end, the MIDAS project has contributed 
towards (i) the establishment and capacity building of the Directorate for Rural Development (future Managing 
Authority) and preparation of the IPARD 2014-2020 Program and of the Code of Good Agricultural Practices; (ii) 
the establishment of the Directorate for Payments (future Paying Agency), including setting up its infrastructure 
that meets accreditation’s requirements, and establishment of the Farm Registry and of the Reference Price 
Database; (iii) provision of grants to agriculture holdings to promote their development and modernization 
along with familiarization of both farmers and Montenegrin authorities with the IPARD rules and principles; and 
(iv) enhancing food safety through investments in the national reference laboratories (Veterinary Lab and 
Institute of Marine Biology), as well as building and equipping the first Border Inspection Post (BIP) in Bar and 
strengthening the sector’s legal and regulatory framework.  
 

Montenegro received the EU’s “Entrustment of budget implementation tasks for EU IPARD funds.” 
Specifically, the entrustment was received in October 2017 for Measure 1 (Investments in physical assets of 
agricultural holdings) and Measure 3 (Investments in physical assets concerning processing and marketing of 
agricultural and fishery products) of the IPARD II Program. To this end, Montenegro’s IPARD II Program for 2014-
2020 (approved by the EU and adopted by the Government of Montenegro in September 2015) is conceived as a 
multi-annual development program for rural areas and proposes seven measures to be co-financed by EU and 
implemented by the Government, for which the Sectoral Agreement between Montenegro and the EU has been 
signed and ratified.  

 

Montenegro has opened negotiations with the EU on Chapter 11 (Agriculture and Rural Development) in 
December 2016, while negotiations for Chapter 12 (Food Safety), and Chapter 13 (Fisheries) were opened in 
June 2016. The opening benchmarks for these chapters have all been met and negotiations positions adopted by 
the Montenegrin Government. MIDAS activities have actively contributed in supporting the country in reaching 
the EU pre-accession negotiation opening benchmarks for Chapters 11 and 12. In this context, the MARD has 
requested the Bank to continue its support to the Ministry with meeting the closing benchmarks of these two 
chapters and provide additional support towards meeting the closing benchmarks for Chapter 13. 
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The Project Development Objective is to improve the competitiveness of agriculture and fisheries in Montenegro 
through enhanced delivery of government support in alignment with EU accession requirements. 

                                                           
1
 The MIDAS is scheduled to close on March 30, 2019 

Key Results 
 
 
D. Project Description  
 

The project will include the following components: 
 

Component 1: Strengthening MARD agriculture, rural development and fisheries program (EUR20 million). 

The component will: (i) increase and diversify income generation opportunities for productive units, and 

contribute to the creation of jobs, and (ii) support Montenegro for meeting Chapter 11 closing benchmarks. 

The grant program is expected to address most of the constraints faced by the country’s agricultural sector, 

including: (i) enabling access to finance to grant beneficiaries to adopt modern technologies; (ii) development 

of aggregators to improve collection, storage, packaging and marketing of produce; and (iii) implementation of 

agro-environmental measures to improve resilience to climatic pressures. 

 

Sub-component 1.1: Increasing and diversifying income opportunities through grants for agriculture, rural 

development and fisheries. This sub-component will support the development of agriculture, rural 

development and fisheries through the provision of grants. The design of the grant program will follow the 

implementation experience gained through the MIDAS project, where “the learning by doing” approach has 

been successfully tested with the core principle of IPARD. Investments are pre-financed by the beneficiaries, 

with reimbursement received upon successful completion and on-spot verification of the investment, and 

according to the share of support to total cost of investment (normally between 50 and 65 percent of the total 

investment); four-eye principle both for administrative control and on-spot control, coordination with 

Technical Bodies as appointed for verification of compliance with relevant national legislation. 

 

The grant program will be targeted at: (i) piloting further IPARD-like measures, including farm diversification 
and on-farm processing, that have not been previously implemented in order to develop the capacity of both 
institutions and beneficiaries while stimulating economic growth in rural areas; (ii) implementing direct 
support for rural development measures, including agro-environment measures, that will support MARD’s 
policy objectives towards harmonization with the CAP; (iii) support to production and processing 
associations/collections centers (including for milk, fruit and vegetables, etc.); and (iv) fisheries grants to 
enhance the capacity of the sector in preparation for the implementation of the European Maritime Fisheries 
Fund. The grant program is expected to leverage private sector investment and beneficiaries’ contribution, as 
well complement public sector investment in the modernization of the fisheries sector under Component 3. 
Detailed criteria, procedures, and related safeguards requirements of the grant program will be described in 
the Grant Operational Manual (GOM), satisfactory to the Bank, which will be prepared during project 
implementation prior to each call. 
 

Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening the MARD toward fulfilling EU accession requirements.  This sub-

component will provide investments to strengthen the DfP (future Paying Agency) management capacity 

through the development of the IACS components required for the management and control of payments to 

productive units, as well as the implementation of the European Agriculture Guarantee Fund, functionality of 



which constitute one of the closing benchmark of Chapter 11. The project will support the development of 

several modules necessary for the operational system of integrated controls, strengthen the regional offices 

for Advisory Services, and build the Paying Agency system at the regional level, which will be part of the final 

structure of a fully functional Paying Agency.  For logistical and accessibility purposes, the two services could 

be hosted in the same building but in different offices, however, the roles and responsibilities of the Advisory 

Services and Paying Agency will be well defined and fully separated from each other. To this end the project 

will finance refurbishing and equipping of existing offices, and purchasing the required hardware and software 

infrastructure. The project will also strengthen capacity of the DfRD, DfA, and DfP through provision of 

technical assistance (TA), training and study tours to assist with the policy design towards the EU CAP, and to 

assist with the design required to finalize the IACS and its various applications.  

 

Component 2: Support for the Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Services (EUR3 million). This 

component will develop capacity for food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary services as part of the creation 

of an integrated food quality system which is consistent with EU requirements. Promoting safer agricultural 

products, including the prevention and control of animal and plant diseases are essential for improving the 

competitiveness of Montenegro’s agricultural production both domestically and abroad. It will also help 

producers to introduce cross-compliance requirements to receive IPARD funds. This component will support: 

(i) the establishment of an official, comprehensive control system for the safe disposal and/or processing of 

animal by-products (ABPs); (ii) strengthening of the diagnostic capacity of the phytosanitary laboratory; and 

(iii) strengthening of the capacity of the inspection services. The following set of activities will be financed 

under this component: 

 

Sub-component 2.1: Safe management of animal by-products (APBs). The project will support the 

establishment of a comprehensive system for the processing and/or disposal for ABPs which will be identified 

and documented in the National Strategy and Action Plan for the Management of ABPs scheduled to be 

adopted by the MARD in late-2017 or early-2018. Specifically, the project will provide TA for the design of a 

control system for the safe management of ABPs. The design will include a business plan for a disposal facility, 

detailed technical specifications and cost estimates for a housing facility. The project will also support the 

gradual operationalization of the official control system for ABPs along the entire chain (production, 

separation, storage, transport, and disposal and/or processing), including training of inspectors and business 

operators, establishing documented procedures and check lists for the approval of establishments and 

inspection thereof, aligning and completing the legal and regulatory framework in line with the current and 

relevant EU acquis and launching a public information and awareness campaign addressed to the associated 

food production/processing industry.  

 

Sub-component 2.2: Strengthening the diagnostic capacity of the phytosanitary laboratory. The project will 

assist the NRL housed at the Bio-Technical Faculty of the University of Montenegro with construction of new 

laboratory facilities (vertically extending an existing site), procurement of laboratory equipment and fixed 

laboratory furniture to support official controls. The project will also provide targeted TA aiming to ensure 

efficient inter-agency collaboration between the AFSVPA and the NRL by means of a Memorandum of 

Understanding, and pave the way towards accreditation of priority tests and methods as per ISO standard 

17025. 



Sub-component 2.3: Support to inspection services. To enable the inspectors of the unified AFSVPA to 

implement effectively the enhanced official control regime arising from alignment of national legislation with 

EU legislation, and the risk-based annual official control and sampling plan, the project will provide new 

vehicles and equipment for collection, cold storage and transport of samples, IT equipment, protective 

clothing, official uniforms, and other items.  

 

Component 3: Modernization of the Fisheries Sector (EUR6 million).  This component will finance public 

sector investment aimed at achieving two objectives: (i) enhancing the productive capacity of the sector with 

investments in basic infrastructure and equipment that will provide fishermen regulated safe, and sanitary 

landing facilities and access to port, and (ii) strengthening the institutional capacity in the sector to apply the 

CFP upon EU accession, as well as substantially strengthen administrative, inspection, and control capacity. 

This component will finance the following interventions: 

 

Sub-component 3.1: Development of a network of landing sites (both in ports and other locations) with 

enhanced access to auxiliary services. Sub-component. A national coastal urban planning strategy is currently 

being elaborated at various levels of government (both national and local), though it is not expected to be fully 

finalized before 2019. This planning process incorporates the designation of several locations for landing sites, 

including in the country’s six coastal cities, where accommodations can be designed for fishing activities in 

existing ports and in new landing sites to be developed. The port towns of Bar (in the far South of the 

country’s coastline), Herceg Novi (the far North of the country’s coastline) and a network of other sites along 

the coastline will be subject to infrastructure improvements and specific sites for construction and 

reconstruction activities will be identified by the Government. The project will finance TA for the preparation 

of designs and technical specifications required for equipment and infrastructure. The project will also finance 

civil works, including construction of facilities for landing, catch data collection, weighing and access to market 

for landed catches in sites that comply with World Bank norms. In addition, and where appropriate, 

improvements will be made in certain locations for access to water and fuel, and operational support (boat 

and gear maintenance).   

   

Sub-Component 3.2: Capacity Building for the Directorate for Fisheries, and support to Associations of 

Fishermen. The MARD Directorate for Fisheries already benefits from the various regional programs 

supporting the sustainable management of marine living resources. Scientific support is provided mainly by 

the Institute of Marine Biology in Kotor, while the Directorate itself is receiving support in the development of 

rules and regulations pertaining to the sector converging towards the full application of the CFP. The project 

will support training and equipment for fisheries inspectors to enable them to meet EU requirements.  

Significant TA support will be provided to Associations of Fishermen, which will be the direct beneficiaries of 

resources from the European Maritime Fisheries Fund (EMFF) designed mainly to cover the added expenses 

incurred by fishermen in application of CFP rules and regulations.  

 

Component 4: Project Management (EUR1 million). This component will cover the costs for project management 
related to staffing, consultancies, and equipment costs, as well as implementation of the Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), monitoring and evaluation of all project activities in line with the Results Framework, 



adequate fiduciary (procurement and financial management), audits and accountability mechanisms for oversight, 
including a grievance redress mechanism.   
 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The MARD will be the lead Implementing Agency and will have overall responsibility for project management 
and implementation. Following the project implementation structure established under the ongoing MIDAS 
Project, relevant Directorates and Administrations within the MARD will be responsible for the technical 
implementation (i.e. preparing terms of reference and technical specifications, preparing training programs, 
supervising consultants and advisors, participating in procurement evaluation committees, etc.) of project 
activities. Specifically, given the extensive experience on implementation of Bank-funded projects, the General 
Director of the Directorate for Payments (DfP) will be appointed as a Project Coordinator. The Director for 
Rural Development (DfRD) will be responsible for the implementation of Component 1; the Director for the 
AFSVPA will be responsible for the implementation of Component 2; and the General Director of the 
Directorate for Fisheries will oversee Component 3 of the project.  

 

An existing, experienced and well-performing Project Management Team (PMT) established to implement the 
MIDAS Project, will also manage MIDAS2. The PMT is currently housed in the DfP premises, and consists of the 
Project Coordinator (General Director of DfP, civil servant), Project Manager, Civil Engineer, IT specialist and 
Safeguards Specialist. Up to the closing date of the MIDAS Project, i.e. March 30, 2019, the proposed Project 
will continue to be supported by the current PMT staff. Thereafter, sufficient resources will be allocated to 
retain a Project Manager and other staff as required. The project implementation team will also continue to 
rely on a part-time environmental and social specialist, who will take active participation in the screening of 
the grants and direct payments as per the ESMF. The specialist’s tasks will include desk reviews, training and 
guidance of the applicants, and site visits to review compliance with both the World Bank safeguards policies 
and relevant Montenegrin laws. In addition, a Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist and other specialists in the 
field of fisheries and civil engineering will be recruited to support MIDAS2. Details of the above-mentioned 
arrangements will be provided in the Project Operational Manual (POM). 
 

A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established and maintained throughout the life of the Project to 
ensure overall coordination and strategic guidance functions. The PSC will be chaired by the Minister of 
Agriculture and Rural Development and will include the Project Coordinator (DfP General Director); General 
Directors of Directorate for Rural Development (DfRD), Directorate for Agriculture (DfA), and Directorate for 
Fisheries (DfF); Director of  the Administration for Food Safety, Veterinary and Phytosanitary Affairs, Advisory 
Services, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Transport and Maritime Affairs, Morsko Dobro, Biotechnical 
Faculty/Phytosanitary Laboratory Director; and representatives of beneficiaries (civil society, local institutions, 
private sector).  

 

Fiduciary responsibilities, including procurement and financial management and disbursement, will be carried 
out by the existing central Technical Services Unit (TSU) under the Ministry of Finance. The TSU will be 
responsible for the preparation of quarterly unaudited financial reports and annual audited financial 
statements. Expenses incurred by the TSU will be financed out of the loan on a pro rata basis with other World 
Bank-financed projects in Montenegro. 


 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will be implemented throughout Montenegro, including the activities targeting the fisheries 
under Component 3 in the coastal part of Montenegro. The activities on grants and direct payments will 
follow the well established screening procedure from the original MIDAS project, and will help screen out 
activities that may have additional safeguards implications. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Vera Dugandzic, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Esma Kreso, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project activities on direct payments and grants 
under Component 1 will finance a diverse series of 
activities aimed at improving the agricultural 
practices in country. However, some of these 
activities, as evident from the support provided 
under the original MIDAS project, could have 
environmental impacts and implications. This 
includes, but is not limited to, small scale 
construction of barns, farm facilities, manure 
management platforms, traditional katuni huts, etc. 
The environmental screening procedure has been 
implemented for the original project and will 
continue to be applicable to these activities; the 
procedure has been slightly revised to reflect the 
envisaged project activities including support to the 
fisheries sector, in the form of an ESMF.  
 Furthermore, the ESMF addresses the construction 

and reconstruction activities under Component 3, 
aimed at improving the pier facilities for the 
fisheries.  There are no major environmental impacts 
anticipated at this stage except for the dust and 
noise, material sourcing, and waste management 
with regards to Components 1 and 3. For 
Component 2, the technical assistance provided will 
help establish a sound management system of the 
animal byproducts as a follow on to the strategic 
planning documents to be developed by the client 
towards the end of 2017. These activities will be 
supplemented by adequate due diligence 
documentation prepared based on the final 
management solution of ABPs.  
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The activities will be carried out on already 
established farms on agricultural land and there will 
be no activities involving natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
There are no activities involving forests foreseen 
under the project. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will support increase and improvement 
in agricultural practices, and may indirectly lead to 
an increase in the pest management practices. The 
project will not support directly purchasing or 
supplying of pest management materials, but the 
project’s ESMF includes a precautionary section on 
PMP. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
There are no activities involving cultural resources 
foreseen under the project. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There are no activities involving indigenous peoples 
foreseen under the project. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The original project triggered the Bank’s Policy OP 
4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement as it was expected 
that the project would finance the construction of 
the Paying Agency building and that land may be 
required to be expropriated for that purpose. The 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) document was 
developed, approved and disclosed in November 
2008. However, the implementing Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Development decided not to 
construct a new building but rather opted to use the 
existing state-owned building. To date, no land 
acquisition took place under the MIDAS and 
associated IPARD-like grants. As stated in the Grant 
Operational Manual (GOM), only activities that do 



not trigger the application of Bank’s OP 4.12 policy 
on Involuntary Resettlement are eligible for grant 
funding. The Grant scheme support program under 
the proposed project will follow the same eligibility 
criteria which clearly state that the activities which  
may result in displacement of any third party 
formally or informally occupying or using the land on 
which the activity is to be implemented will be 
excluded from financing. Only activities that are 
located on the farmer’s own land or on land for 
which the grant applicant has written consent from 
the owner to use the land will be eligible for funding. 
Additionally, no land acquisition will take place 
under the sub-component on development of the 
landing places (piers) and their auxiliary services in 
the ports of Bar and Herceg Novi as the civil works 
will be carried out in public maritime domain. In 
brief, project will not support any activities which 
might involve involuntary taking of land or physical 
or economic displacement of squatters, scavengers, 
or any other third party formally or informally 
occupying or using the land. 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
There are no activities involving dams foreseen 
under the project. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

The activities under Component 3 aimed at 
supporting and improving the docking facilities for 
fisheries may pose a risk to international waterways, 
i.e. the Adriatic Sea. However, due to the scope of 
works there is very little potential to impact the 
quantity and quality of water to riparians.In 
consultations with LEGEN it was determined that the 
activities are not of such scope or scale that would 
require triggering of this policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potential environmental and social impacts that are foreseen for the activities financed under the project are not 
large scale, significant or irreversible. The activities financed under the project can be broadly grouped into three 

groups, per project components: the grants and direct payments scheme, the support to the fisheries sector through 
small scale infrastructure interventions and the technical assistance towards establishment of a management system 
of animal byproducts (ABPs). The grant scheme activities will be screened using an ESMF and a mechanism established 
under the original MIDAS 1 project. The procedure will screen out activities that correspond to a Category A or that 
trigger additional safeguards policies. For activities that correspond to a World Bank Category B adequate due 
diligence will be prepared. The ESMF also sets up the monitoring and follow up activities that the PMT will undertake. 
The activities supporting the fisheries component will be subject to a Checklist EMP for simple infrastructure works, 
since all of the works anticipated are of a limited scope and to be carried out within the existing marine areas 
designated for reception of the fisheries fleet. Support provided under the animal byproducts Technical Assistance, 
will be supplemented with the adequate environmental and social due dilligence documentation, that would be 
adapted to the final selection of the methods and treatment chosen for safe management of ABPs. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
There are no indirect or long term impacts anticipated in the project area due to the project financed activities. All of 
the activities are limited in scope and localized to a given location. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
No alternatives have been considered. The ESMF will screen out activities based on the associated impact and 
activities corresponding to a Category A or triggering additional safeguards policies will not be financed. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Client has a well established PMT with a part time environmental and social specialist in place. The key staff have 
attended multiple World Bank environmental safeguards trainings and have a good track record along with the 
experience of implementing multiple rounds of grant calls and screening of all received applications. The PMT has 
strong ownership over the screening process and have used each subsequent call to additionally fine-tune the 
screening procedures, and to also conduct environmental awareness raising trainings for all applicants. The Client has 
prepared a revised ESMF coupled with the Checklist EMP for the fisheries component and a precautionary Integrated 
Pest Management Plan and has disclosed this document with the public consultations held on November 10, 2017 in 
Podgorica. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the project beneficiaries, that is the farmers and agricultural and fisheries workers, along 
with the neighbors and adjacent plots that could be impacted by the supported activities. Additionally, the 
stakeholders that may be involved include the different institutions supporting the development and operations of the 
agricultural sector in country, including government institutions, academia and  non-governmental institutions. The 
client has publically disclosed the ESMF with an announcement made on their website and through the local media for 
the public consultations that were held on November 10, 2017in Podgorica. In addition to the public consultations of 
the ESMF, each of the ESMPs that will be produced under the ESMF procedure will also be subject to public disclosure 
and consultations, as well as the Checklist EMPs for the fisheries infrastructure. Overall, the project has an established 
grieveance redress mechanism where each of the affected parties can communicate directly with the designated 
contact person through established email and telephone contacts. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (P166222) 

 
 

  
May 28, 2018 Page 1 of 14  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC24937 
     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Papua New Guinea P166222  PNG Agriculture 
Commercialization and 
Diversification Project 
(P166222) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Sep 03, 2018 Jan 31, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of National 
Planning and 
Monitoring,Independant 
State of Papua New Guinea 

Department of Agriculture 
and Livestock 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the productivity and access to markets of target smallholder farmers and small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) for selected agricultural value-chains, in selected economic corridors. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 40.00 

Total Financing 40.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 40.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 40.00 

          IDA Credit 40.00 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT 

 
 
 
A. Country Context 
 

The Independent State of Papua New Guinea (PNG) is one of the most culturally diverse countries in the world with over 
800 languages and 1,000 ethnic groups1. It has a total land area of approximately 460,000km2 comprised of 600 islands 
of various sizes, and hosts a remarkably varied number of species and ecosystems. The country is separated into four 
regions – Highlands, Islands, Momase and Southern – and 21 provinces. In 2017, its population was estimated at close to 
8 million2. Of this, over 80 percent live in rural areas and the rest in small urban centers with populations of under 
30,000.    
 
PNG is a relatively stable democracy and had an average GDP growth of 6.85 percent between 2005 and 2010, however 
like other resource-dependent countries, it is feeling the impacts of the fall in global commodity prices, with GDP growth 
estimated at 2.4 percent in 2016 and projected for 2.1 percent in 20173 and real GDP per capita growth in 2016 was 0.3 
percent, down from 10.1 percent in 2014. The country is dominated by two main sectors: the formal, capital-intensive 
mining and energy sector which relies heavily on the country’s rich natural resources and accounts for most of the 
export earnings, and the agriculture sector which, while largely informal, employs an estimated 80 percent of the 
population and accounts for approximately 27 percent of GDP3.  
 
Despite considerable natural wealth and reasonable economic performance over the past decade, PNG’s rural 
population continues to face significant challenges. The disparity between rural and urban living conditions is 
exacerbated by the country’s difficult terrain which increases hardship, poverty, and isolation in rural areas, and limits 
access to basic services, infrastructure and economic markets. Less than 20 percent of rural households have access to 
electricity, 60 percent lack access to safe drinking water, and an estimated 80 percent lack access to improved 
sanitation2.    
 
The 2010 Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) noted that in 2009, approximately 38 percent of the 
population lived below the extreme poverty line of US $1.90 per day, about the same proportion as in 1996.  PNG’s 
Human Development Index (HDI) ranking was 155 in 2010 and improved by one place to 154 in 2015, the second lowest 
in the Pacific2. It has the fourth highest child stunting rate in the world. An estimated 28 percent of children are 
underweight and 5-15 percent are wasted. The highlands region has the highest rates of stunting at 61.5 percent, and 

the island region has the highest wasting and underweight rates at 19 percent and 29.2 percent respectively. The 
economic cost of undernutrition is high, in 2015-2016, it was estimated to have cost the economy 2.81 percent of 
annual GDP (equivalent to US$ 508 million)4.   
 
Gender-based violence (GBV) is widespread in PNG, and the country ranks 158 out of 188 countries in the 2014 Gender 
Inequality Index3. GBV severely affects women’s ability to contribute to the economy, participate in business activities, 
and support family livelihoods. Violence and crime are high along the country’s transport corridors where much of the 
rural population are engaged in agriculture, trade, and the transportation of goods. 
 
PNG’s road network is highly fragmented and poorly maintained with only about 35 percent of national roads sealed2 
and no roads connecting most provinces and ports. PNG’s vulnerability to climate risks and hazards due to climate 
variability and complex geography further exacerbate problems with the transport network resulting in an estimated 75 
percent or more of the road network – national, provincial and district – becoming impassable at some point during the 
year2. The country is subject to both El Niño and La Niña events and both can have significant impacts such as severe 
droughts, landslides and flooding from increased rainfall5. The World Risk Report 2016 ranks PNG 10th, with a risk index 
of 16.43%, due to the country’s high exposure to natural disasters and its high social and economic vulnerability to these 
events6. The February 2018 magnitude 7.5 earthquake and aftershocks affected 544,368 people across five provinces of 
Hela, Southern, Enga, Western and Gulf provinces. In the Southern Highlands and Hela provinces alone, it is estimated to 
have killed over 100 people, displaced 18,200 and left 270,442 people in need of immediate humanitarian assistance. It 
has also left 32% of health facilities closed and, of those that are open, only a third are undamaged7. 
 
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Sectoral context:  
PNG is characterized by its diverse agro-ecological environments (highlands, lowlands, islands), favorable climate and 
fertile soils allowing the farming of many different agricultural products, including both cultivation of cash and staple 
crops, as well as livestock production. While PNG’s export economy is presently dominated by minerals (gold and 
copper) and oil, the contribution of agricultural exports in the renewable resources sector is significant, at around 
23.1%. The main agricultural exports of the country include cocoa, coffee, copra, palm oil, rubber, and tea. The 
predominant mode of farming is in smallholder farms of less than 5 ha. Village agriculture, which supports over 80 
percent of the population, remains dominated by subsistence food production. It generates little cash income and is 
characterized by low productivity. Despite good intentions, governments, commodity boards and agencies have 
provided village farmers with little help to raise their productivity in order to improve food and nutrition security, and to 
enable them to participate more effectively in commercial activities. Translation of new knowledge to business and 
commercial opportunities has been lacking for many years. Major crops, except palm oil, have historically been 
marketed by statutory marketing boards. These arrangements as well as measures in the past such as stabilization funds 
for selected commodities (coffee, cocoa, and coconuts) have not been efficient, with over regulation of major 
commodities perhaps impeding agricultural development. In the past, labor-intensive plantation estates of some 50-150 
hectares have grown tree products for export, especially palm oil, coffee, cocoa, coconut, tea, and rubber, but except 
for palm oil, their production share is decreasing to the benefit of smallholder farmers. 
 
Coffee and cocoa are key cash crops. Papua New Guinea is considered a small coffee producer in the international 
market, but the high quality of its coffee and cocoa is recognized and sought after. Nearly 30 and 20 percent of the total 

       
     

labor force in the country is engaged in the production of coffee and cocoa, respectively. The majority of coffee is under 
the production of smallholder farmers with low productivity, and diseconomies of scale, and the main constraint is the 
limited capacity of the country to reliably meet market demand in quantity and quality. The development of coffee and 
cocoa production as an agribusiness for smallholder farmers is limited due to several constraints. These include: high 
transaction costs due to diseconomies of scale, limited market access, lack of access to information and technologies 
due to poor extensions services, poor rural infrastructure, and lack of access to rural finance. 
 
A robust internal fresh food and livestock products market exists. However, value chains are not well developed. 
Livestock production, except for pigs and poultry, remains static or on the decline since the 1970s. Meat consumption in 
PNG on the other hand, has increased steadily over the last two decades, and is predicted to increase at a conservative 
rate of 5% per annum. Increased demand for meat is met by meat imports, and is influenced by population growth rate, 
urbanization, changes in disposable income of citizens, and changes in people’s eating habits. 
 
Agriculture has under-performed. This is due primarily to low productivity, largely reflecting inadequate research and 
development, poor application of technological improvements and lack of scale economies inherent in smallholder 
farming. Other major constraints include inadequate transport and marketing infrastructure facilities, unreliable and 
expensive utilities, poor extension and veterinary services, prevalent crime and lawlessness, and insecurity of land 
ownership and tenure. However, some reasons for hope exist. For instance, the World Bank funded Productive 
Partnerships in Agriculture project (PPAP – P110959) is demonstrating in the coffee and cocoa sectors that the 
productive partnership model can help overcome some of the bottlenecks and facilitate the integration of smallholder 
farmers into effective supply/value-chains and link them to markets, which remains a priority for the Government of 
PNG (GoPNG). In the PPAP model, farmers join a partnership coordinated by a “Lead Partner (LP)” (the private sector in 
70 percent of cases, although sometimes an NGO or academic institution) through paying a small fee (contribution to 
the planned activities). The LP access a grant from the project to purchase tools and seedlings (including innovative 
cocoa clones) to be distributed to farmers, renovate processing facilities or organize training on a broad range of topics; 
technical (coffee or cocoa on-farm good practice), gender, HIV-AIDS, nutrition, etc. This increased proximity between LPs 
and the smallholder farmers has greatly contributed to: (i) increasing their on-farm productivity (over two-fold as of the 
time of writing), and (ii) link them to a potential buyer and therefore the markets.  
 
In December 2014, the World Bank completed a piece of analytical work studying the role of women in the agriculture 
sector in PNG8, notably related to coffee, cocoa and fresh produce. The main finding was that women provide 
substantial labor in both coffee and cocoa cultivation, and they dominate in the fresh produce sectors. More important 
than the amount of labor women provide, analysis of these supply chains indicated that the specific tasks women 
undertake have a direct bearing on the quality of the final product. However, different labor dynamics, gender-specific 
barriers to access key services (extension and financial) and insecurity (violence limiting women’s ability to serve in the 
field as researchers and extension agents) affect this potential outcome. In early 2018, a more specific gender time-use 
study among PPAP farmers9 highlighted that there is an imbalance between men and women’s time-use with possible 
discrimination against women which negatively impacts crop productivity and household welfare. Beside household 
awareness-raising and training on gender dynamics, reducing the domestic work burden for women before they can 
engage in more value-added agricultural activities should be a priority. 
 
Institutional context:  


The GoPNG’s Vision 2050 details the long-term development strategy for PNG.  Launched in 2009, the document sets 
out a vision for transforming the country by 2050 towards a top 50 ranking in the HDI10. It leverages seven strategic 
pillars – human development, wealth creation, environment and climate change, planning, systems and institutions, 
security and international relations, and partnerships with churches – to build this vision and realign the country’s 
economic focus away from the mining and energy sectors which currently dominate development, to new growth 
bases in agriculture, fisheries, forestry, manufacturing and eco-tourism.   
 
Vision 2050 acknowledges both the importance of subsistence agriculture to the rural economy and the cultural lives of 
many, as well as the significant challenges faced by the sector including limited markets, poor infrastructure, ineffective 
extension services, and security and safety concerns.  
 
The previous GoPNG’s National Agriculture Development Plan (NADP) 2007-2016 (currently being updated) recognized 

the importance of the agricultural sector in developing the economic potential of the country, sustaining the basic 

livelihoods of its population, increasing social wellbeing, and providing food security for all. However, its 

implementation has faced several challenges relating to the limited capacity of the Department of Agriculture and 

Livestock (DAL) to enhance implementation performance and monitor progress of outcomes in the sector. 

 
The GoPNG’s Alotau Accord II operationalizes the National Strategy for Responsible and Sustainable Development 
through the Medium-Term Development Plan (MTDP) III reflecting the principles of the PNG Vision 2050 and the PNG 
Development Strategic Plan 2010 - 2030. High on the list of priorities is the adoption of a national population policy 
aimed at accelerating economic growth by using economic stimulus packages in the non-minerals sector (agriculture, 
tourism, fisheries and forestry) to keep pace with a population currently increasing at a growth rate of about 3 percent 
annually.  
 
The government has placed greater emphasis on growing the agriculture sector by giving it greater prominence in its 
2018 budget allocation. To emphasize this commitment, the government held the first ever National Agriculture 
Summit in November 2017 to exchange experiences on successful models. The key priorities from the summit are to: (i) 
grow the economy; (ii) promote import substitution; (iii) promote more accessible and affordable credit; and (iv) place 
greater focus on institutional strengthening. 
 
C. Relationship to CPF 
 

The 2017 PNG Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) is under preparation and is scheduled for Board approval in early 
May 2018. The SCD recognizes the World Bank Group’s long-standing history of support to the agriculture sector in PNG, 
currently led by the Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project (PPAP). Since 2011, the PPAP has been providing 
support to smallholder coffee and cocoa farmers with the aim of improving their livelihoods. Important lessons have 
emerged from the implementation of the PPAP which could assist the SCD to identify opportunities for inclusive growth 
in the agriculture sector in PNG, and support the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting 
shared prosperity. The third Pillar of the draft SCD (Enabling private sector development for inclusive job creation and 
growth) recognizes the central role played by agriculture in providing opportunities for inclusive growth and bolstering 
food security. The SCD recommends an “extension of PPAP-type programs to more districts and regions and more crop-
types” – which is exactly what the PACD intends to do. 

PROPOSED PDO/RESULTS 

    

 
A. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To increase the productivity and access to markets of target smallholder farmers and small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) for selected agricultural value-chains, in selected economic corridors.  

 
B. Key Results 
 

Progress will be measured against the following PDO-level indicators: 
 

(a) Increased farm yields of crops and livestock in target value-chains 

(b) Increased volume of sale of selected value-chains at both farm gate and processing SMEs levels 

(c) Total number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender 

 
A detailed results framework will be developed during preparation. Specific gender and citizen engagement indicators 
will be added in this results framework.  
 

PROJECT CONTEXT 

 
A. Concept 
 
1. Description 

 
The Productive Partnerships in Agriculture Project (PPAP P110959 + PPAP AF P146003) is scheduled to close on June 30, 
2019 and has delivered significant benefits to PNG’s cocoa and coffee sector farmers. In order to build on and 
consolidate PPAP’s achievements, the PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (PACD) would 
continue to support the cocoa and coffee sectors, and may also add the following commodities: small livestock, spices, 
rubber and coconuts. The additional commodities to be supported under the new project will be narrowed down to 2 
or 3 commodities based on criteria, including level of preparedness of the value-chain and possible return on 
investments11. Further stock-taking will be required during the project preparation, including, if the need is identified, 
specific value-chain analysis to help the decision-making process. DAL has already started this work which should be 
completed prior to pre-Appraisal. The FAO Investment Center will support the DAL and the WB Task Team in this stock-
taking exercise and commodity final selection. 
 
Beneficiaries: GoPNG’s emphasis is on agriculture to accelerate economic growth and generate revenues, this may 
require a targeted approach towards farmers willing to move from subsistence to semi-commercial or commercial 
farming (therefore being less inclusive than in the case of PPAP). However, the smallholder farmers remain the primary 
direct beneficiaries of the new project, together with the groups and cooperatives formed by those better-off and 
willing to address common issues collectively. While building on PPAP, considerations around the possibility of looking 
at a complementary window targeting more progressive farmers and those who are ready to take risks and form more 

                                            
11 Agreed criteria comprise: (i) competitiveness and existence of a market justifying good return on investments, (ii) availability of technical advisory and 
extension services for these specific commodities, whether of public or private origin, (iii) tradition of integrating the selected commodities in cocoa and 
coffee farming system, as a diversification strategy, (iv) importance of women participation in the specific commodities, (v) share of the value-chains’ 
income remaining with the smallholder producers, (vi) size of the population involved or benefiting from the selected commodities, and (vii) commitment 
of different level of Government (including Provincial and District) to it. 

commercial alliances under a common set of constraints and opportunities will be explored. Additional direct 
beneficiaries will be SMEs (mainly micro- and small private enterprises) involved in agri-business activities (storage, 
processing, marketing, inputs supply). DAL and Commodities Board staff will also benefit from capacity building 
interventions. 
  
Regarding the geographical scope, the MTDP identifies ten “Economic Corridors” for priority services delivery, defining 
zones for development of public transport and utilities network, social services and integration of economic plans 
including agriculture. The PACD will align its geographical scope to this GoPNG strategy and support some of these 
economic corridors, based on transparent selection criteria to be defined during preparation. 
 
The PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (PACD) -  interventions will be delivered through five 
components:  

 
Component 1: Institutional capacity building 
The project will address institutional capacity gaps at (i) the central level - DAL, statutory bodies in charge of 
commodities targeted under the project (Cocoa Board, Coffee Industry Corporation, Spices Industry Board, the 
Livestock Development Corporation (LDC) and the Rubber Board – list to be confirmed as per commodities selected 
under the project) and links with the private sector – and, (ii) the decentralized level – provincial and district capacity to 
deliver services: extension, advisory and veterinary services, access to inputs. Research needs may also be included and 
will depend on further discussion during preparation.  
  
This first component will also support the GoPNG in reviewing and, if required, reforming their policy and regulatory 
framework, notably on climate-smart agriculture, extension and veterinary services, quality standards and food safety. 
 
Component 2: Infrastructure networks and logistics 
The infrastructure network, including roads and storage/processing facilities, remains a major bottleneck to farmers’ 
capacity to access markets. This project should contribute to its improvement, with a focus on infrastructure that has a 
public good nature and is essential to the selected value chains. Examples of such infrastructure include feeder roads, 
municipality-managed small-scale slaughterhouses (ensuring better food safety and waste management / pollution 
reduction) or laboratories (for safety and quality tests). As per the PPAP model, feeder roads will be designed and 
constructed to be resistant to heavy rains occurring during the rainy season: they will be slightly curved, include large 
concrete gutters on the side and small log-bridges on water stream sites – therefore adapted to heavy rains which are 
increasing and longer-lasting due to climate change. 
 
Component 3: Productive Partnership-like interventions 
Integrating smallholder farmers into effective supply/value-chains and linking them to markets remains a priority for 
the GoPNG. For this, the Productive Partnerships’ model implemented under the PPAP has been successful and should 
be a strong building block to scale-up. However, additional focus should be put on approaches that promote the 
establishment and capacity building of farmers’ cooperatives that will strengthen the sustainability of the model, 
among other lessons learned.  
 
This component will promote access to services and markets by facilitating the establishment of Productive 
Partnerships, and their access to finance (Matching Grants; involvement of financial institutions) that could finance 
small collective infrastructure (e.g. small storage and processing facilities like community-managed cocoa 
fermenteries), and the introduction of innovative technologies, notably on climate smart agriculture (agro-forestry, 

water collection and micro-irrigation, drought resistance varieties, intensification of small livestock production such as 
poultry and pigs, and bio-digesters). This will be done through establishing two windows for financing:  

(i) one focusing on on-farm productivity (garden regeneration, innovative technologies, etc.) and more inclusive 

regarding smallholder farmers willing/unwilling to join partnerships – this window will expand on the PPAP 

model where a Lead Partner (often from the private sector) can aggregate smallholder farmers and channel 

support to them (advisory services, training, inputs); and  

(ii) one focusing on value-addition and marketing of products, and targeting better-off farmers willing to address a 

common issue (storage, agro-processing, marketing, access to inputs, etc.) collectively through groups and 

cooperatives who become the recipient of the funds. 

 
Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation:  
This activity would support all PCU activities required to manage IDA funds, procure IDA-funded goods and services, 
conduct project M&E including Iterative Beneficiary Monitoring (IBM),12 and comply with safeguard mitigation 
measures.  It would provide training and equipment to modernize DAL operations (computer hardware and software, 
office furniture, vehicles, and so on) at the central level and in the field as needed for project activities. It would also 
support the development and implementation of a communications strategy, as well as general awareness and 
sensitization campaigns about project activities. 
 
Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response Component (Total Cost: US$0):  

Following an eligible crisis or emergency, the government of PNG may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to 
support emergency response and reconstruction. This component would draw from the uncommitted grant resources 
under the project from other project components to cover an emergency response. These activities would be carried 
out, as needed, to ensure continued achievement of the project development objective. This component will only be 
used in the event that an emergency response is required. 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Target provinces and districts are yet to be confirmed. The project is likely to support core coca production areas in the 

province of East New Britain, the autonomous Region of Bougainville (tropical island regions) and East Sepik (Momase 
Region), and coffee production areas in the provinces of Eastern Highlands, Western Highlands and Simbu (highlands 
regions). The project may expand its geographical coverage with potential support in the livestock, spices, rubber and 
coconut sectors in the same areas.  
PNG is characterized by diverse agricultural and ecological environments, tropical climate and fertile soils. Physical 

characteristics vary considerably between regions and will be described once project location and sectors are confirmed. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The project will be implemented by the Department of Agriculture and Livestock (DAL - lead agency) through a Project 

                                            
12 This activity would monitor beneficiaries of the project starting at the beginning of the implementation with the objective to improve project 
efficiency and increase beneficiary satisfaction and beneficiary engagement. IBM collects information on project implementation, even in insecure 
settings. It is light, low-cost, and rapidly complements project supervision. The approach is problem-oriented and provides feedback to project 
teams through different iterations with the aim of catalyzing improvements in project implementation. IBM collects data directly from beneficiaries 
but keeps data collection efforts to a minimum by relying on few research questions and small samples. 



Coordination Unit (PCU), with specific Project Management Units (PMUs) established for each selected commodity. The 
Department of Works (DOW) will be designated responsibility for infrastructure networks and logistics activities related 
to rural feeder (not paved) roads. 
 
Capacity for implementing safeguard policies is currently weak in each of these agencies. The DAL lacks specific 

safeguard resources. The current World Bank financed PPAP has addressed safeguard capacity constraints within the 
cocoa and coffee PMUs however capacity remains limited and confined to these sub-sectors. DOW has an Environmental 
Management Unit (EMU) however this unit is under-resourced and relatively inexperienced. To address these constraints, 
the PACD will establish a core safeguards team consisting of senior environmental and social specialists within the PCU to 
ensure the effective implementation of safeguard policies across all project activities. The PACD will also finance 
additional environmental and social specialists within DOW to oversee safeguard requirements for project infrastructure 
network and logistic activities related to rural roads. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Thomas John Callander, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Nicholas John Valentine, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Nathalie Suzanna Noella Staelens, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is proposed as Category B. The proposed 
investments are small-scale and potential adverse 
impacts can be managed. There are no potential large-
scale, significant or irreversible impacts associated 
with the project. 
 
The project will finance small collective infrastructure 
for partnerships (Component 3) including innovative 
technologies, notably on climate smart agriculture 
(agro-forestry, water collection and micro-irrigation, 
drought resistance varieties, intensification of small 
livestock production (poultry, pigs) and bio-digesters) 
that have the potential for positive impacts on the 
environment. Negative environmental and social 
impacts associated with these activities are expected 
to be minor, localized and temporary primarily 
because of their small-scale and 
household/community focus. 
 
The project will invest in infrastructure networks to 
improve access to market (Component 2). This will 
involve the rehabilitation of feeder roads and the 
development of small-scale community infrastructure 



 
The World Bank  
PNG Agriculture Commercialization and Diversification Project (P166222) 

 
 

  
May 28, 2018 Page 11 of 14  

     

(e.g. small-scale slaughter house and laboratories). 
These small-scale investments have the potential to 
cause some minor adverse environmental and social 
impacts however these are readily managed through 
standard mitigation measures. 
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) is proposed as the safeguards instrument given 
that the specific locations of the investments are not 
known and these will be determined through the 
partnership/grant process. The ESMF will incorporate 
the requirements of the World Group’s 
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) 
and industry specific guidelines for agribusiness, food 
production and pesticides management. 
 
The project also includes a Contingency Emergency 
Response Component to support emergency activities 
that ensure continued achievement of the project 
development objective. The ESMF will outline the 
approach and principles for managing potential E&S 
impacts and risks of the CERC including a screening 
process in accordance with the World Bank’s Rapid 
Response to Crises and Emergencies: Procedural 
Guidelines. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

The project will not finance any activities that 
significantly convert or degrade any protected areas or 
natural habitats as the screening procedures in the 
ESMF will exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Potential project target sectors including cocoa, spices 
and rubber are frequently associated with agro-
forestry in PNG, often in a positive way. No adverse 
impacts on forests are anticipated. The ESMF will 
contain measures to properly manage the risk of any 
unforeseen adverse environmental impacts of these 
activities. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will support the sustainable use of 
chemical fertilizers and pesticides within an holistic 
farm management model and integrated pest 
management approach. The client will review and 
update the current PPAP Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) following the standards and requirements set 
forth in OP4.09 and the World Group’s Environmental, 
Health and Safety Guidelines (EHSGs) for agribusiness 


and food production. The project will include 
measures to strengthen the institutional capacity for 
implementing IPM in project areas. This will include a 
stronger focus on health and safety. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project will not finance any activities that will have 
impacts on physical cultural resources. Screening and 
chance find procedures will be included in the ESMF to 
exclude all subprojects with these impacts. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project is likely to be located in areas where 
Indigenous Peoples are the sole or the overwhelming 
majority of direct project beneficiaries. Accordingly, a 
separate Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF) is not proposed. Rather, in accordance with the 
provisions of OP 4.10, the elements of an IPPF is 
included in the overall project design.  
 
The ESMF will outline steps for ensuring free and prior 
informed consultation are undertaken and broad 
community support is achieved for each Partnership 
and Infrastructure activity under Components 2 and 3 
respectively. This will include a Beneficiaries 
Partnership Framework and Consultation Guidelines. 
 
A Social Assessment will be conducted across target 
sectors/provinces during project preparation to inform 
project design and will include consultations with 
farming communities, local level government 
representatives, grower associations and 
cooperatives, youth and women’s groups, extension 
workers, the private sector, and other relevant 
stakeholders. 
. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

At present, no involuntary land acquisition is expected 
under the project. The majority of sub-projects will be 
undertaken on customary land with the voluntary 
participation of grants scheme recipient landowners. 
The only exception will be the siting of collective 
infrastructure facilities which will be either on 
Government-owned land or land secured via voluntary 
land donation. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
will be prepared to address these potential scenarios. 
The RFP will include a voluntary land donation 
protocol to ensure that this approach is properly used, 
verified and documented. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any dams as defined under 
OP 4.37. 


Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not impact or relate to any known 
international waterways as defined under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project is not located in any known disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Aug 31, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The PPAP PCU is in charge of coordinating the preparation of the proposed PACD. Safeguards specialists working for the 

PPAP, together with the support of external safeguards consultants, will conduct the social assessment and consultations 
across target sectors/provinces to inform project design and the preparation of ESMF and RFP. 
 
A Project preparation Advance (PPA) will be processed once the Concept Note is approved and the procurement process 

for these consultants will start after. Therefore, first drafts of these studies are not expected before end of August 2018. 
 
























































World Bank Document


PROGRAM INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE  

    November 4, 2016 

Report No.: 110125 

 

Operation Name Second Development Policy Operation 

Region EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 

Country Moldova 

Sector General public administration sector (30%); Banking (20%); 

Public administration- Industry and trade (20%); General 

finance sector (20%); General agriculture, fishing and forestry 

sector (10%) 

Operation ID P149555 

Lending Instrument Development Policy Financing 

Borrower(s) THE REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA 

Implementing Agency MINISTRY OF FINANCE 

Date PID Prepared November 4, 2016 

Estimated Date of Appraisal November 4, 2016 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

December 16, 2016 

Corporate Review Decision October 21, 2016 

 

 Country and Sector Background 

Moldova has experienced rapid growth and poverty reduction over the past decade, 

although deterioration in external conditions and increased governance challenges since 

2014 have led to slower growth. Since the early 2000s, the economy has expanded by an 

average of 5 percent a year. Poverty declined substantially to 11 percent in 2014 from 26 

percent in 2007 (using the national poverty line) and from much higher levels earlier in the 

decade. Consumption growth among the bottom 40 percent of the population w as consistently 

higher than average consumption growth. Since 2014, however, external conditions have 

deteriorated significantly with the slowdown in the European Union (EU) and the Russian 

Federation on which Moldova is dependent for trade and remittances. This, together with a 

series of summer droughts and increased governance challenges, particularly in the financial 

sector, have resulted in slower growth in Moldova. The economy contracted by 0.5 percent in 

2015 and public and guaranteed debt increased to 46.6 percent of gross domestic product 

(GDP) from 38.2 percent a year earlier. A rebound in agriculture, in 2016, together with recent 

reforms are helping Moldova respond to adversity. Growth is projected to improve modestly to 

2.2 percent in 2016. 

Progress in poverty reduction has been driven largely by remittances and pensions, with 

the reform program supported by DPO-2 taking initial steps toward addressing the 

medium-term challenge of shifting toward greater sustainability. Remittances have made a 

significant contribution to domestic income, which has fueled private consumption and, 

together with exports, driven economic growth. Remittances, mainly going to rural areas where 

many of the poor are, have also contributed to poverty reduction and the welfa re improvement 

of the bottom 40. Pensions have also played an important role in raising incomes among the 
population, although mainly in urban areas. At the same time, employment has declined, led by 

falling labor force participation rates among both men and women which have reached very 

low levels compared to other countries. This declining labor supply is largely explained by a 

combination of greater emigration flows, the segment of the inactive labor force who have 

future migration plans, and informal workers who drop out of the labor force, all symptoms of 

low labor demand and limited availability of productive jobs. In fact, the lack of jobs and the 

wage differential with richer neighboring countries continue to motivate emigration. Going 

forward, the reforms to improve the business climate, enhance financial sector stability, and 

improve expenditure efficiency should help Moldova move toward a more sustainable model 

of growth and poverty reduction driven by private sector job creation. 

European integration has anchored the government’s policy reform agenda since 2009, 

but political instability and governance challenges have slowed the pace of reform.  
Negotiations between Moldova and the EU on an Association Agreement and a Deep and 

Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement began in 2010 and were concluded on June 27, 2014, 

with the signing of both documents. Visa-free access for Moldovan citizens travelling to the 

Schengen area went into effect in April 2014. However, periodic breakdowns in pro -European 

coalitions made progress uneven. Governance challenges have continued to take the center 

stage, as exemplified by the banking fraud revealed in 2014 that involved the loss of the 

equivalent of over 10 percent of the country’s GDP. After a period of short -lived governments, 

the Government of Mr. Filip was appointed in January 2016, dedicating policy efforts on 

stabilizing the macroeconomic situation, increasing transparency, and addressing identified 

weaknesses in the financial sector. 

The proposed operation supports the efforts of the Moldovan authorities to address key 

constraints to inclusive and sustainable growth by consolidating reform efforts in three 

areas. Accordingly, the proposed operation is built around three pillars, which are also the 

program development objectives. The first pillar of the operation seeks to strengthen the 

regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business environment, fac ilitate 

competition, and reduce regulatory compliance costs. The second pillar aims at strengthening 

financial sector stability, promoting transparency of shareholding, and easing conditions for 

access to finance. The third pillar, focusing on the quality of public spending, seeks to improve 

the public investment management (PIM) framework, make investment subsidies in agriculture 

more efficient and equitable, and improve the coverage of well-targeted social assistance 

programs. The reform program builds on strong complementarity with other World Bank 

Group instruments in Moldova, including investment projects and analytical and advisory 

activities. In addition, although not a formal continuation of the previous program, the first two 

pillars of this series support the implementation of select laws supported by the 

Competitiveness DPO (approved in FY2013). 

 Operation Objectives 

The proposed DPL series supports the Government of Moldova's to improve the business 

climate, promote financial sector stability and development, and improve the equity and 

efficiency of public expenditure. The proposed operation is the second in a planned 

programmatic series of two single-tranche operations supporting key policy and institutional 

reforms with three development objectives: 



 Pillar A: Strengthen the regulatory framework to improve predictability of the business 
environment, facilitate competition and reduce regulatory compliance costs. 

 Pillar B: Strengthen financial sector stability, promote transparency of shareholding and ease 
conditions for access to finance. 

 Pillar C: Improve the public investment management framework, make investment subsidies 
in agriculture more efficient and equitable and improve the coverage of well-targeted social 

assistance programs. 

The Pillar A seeks to improve the business environment facing Moldovan companies and 

farms. Supported measures aim to reduce the burden of regulatory and compliance costs of state 

inspections and to enhance competition and to set up an institutional mechanism for information 

collection on all state aid to increase transparency on how state aid is granted and contribute to a 

more efficient use of state budget resources. 

The objective of the Pillar B is to support the Moldovan authorities to build a more 

sustainable, resilient, and transparent financial sector that can prudently expand access 

to financial services. The policy actions address priority reforms in the areas of the corporate 

shares registry, the integrity of shareholders’ ownership rights, corporate gover nance 

standards, shareholder transparency, and proper supervision by NBM and NCFM. Reforms 

under this pillar are also aimed at enhancing access to finance, which continues to constrain 

private sector development, especially for SMEs and entrepreneurs. 

Pillar C focuses on improving the public investment management framework, making 

investment subsidies in agriculture more efficient and equitable and improving the 

coverage of well-targeted social assistance programs. Existing inefficiencies and inequities 

in the allocation and implementation of public investment resources, including in the 

agriculture sector, and the erosion of coverage in well-targeted social assistance programs 

reduce the effectiveness of public spending for reaching national strategic objec tives, poverty 

reduction and promoting shared prosperity. Transforming the economy will require significant 

upgrades in infrastructure through public investments. Moreover, adequate appraisal of 

investment projects ensures cost effectiveness. Agricultural support to small or individual 

farmers is still modest, and does not reflect their current and potential role in high -value 

agricultural production. 

 Rationale for Bank Involvement 

This operation (second in a programmatic series of two) supports efforts of the 

Government to improve the business climate, promote financial sector stability and 

development, and improve the equity and efficiency of public expenditure, and is aligned 

with the National Development Strategy “Moldova 2020” (NDS). The three pillars of the 

operation directly support three of the eight national priorities in the NDS: “improving the 

business climate” (supported by Pillar A), “reducing financing costs” (supported by Pillar B), 

and “ensuring competitiveness of agro-food products” (supported by Pillar A and C). In 

addition, improving the public investment management framework is expected to contribute to 

efficiency of public spending, and ultimately, to growth. Increasing the coverage of well -

targeted social assistance programs is expected to contribute to poverty reduction and to 

increase shared prosperity, while maintaining fiscal sustainability. The reforms supported in 

this DPL series are informed by substantial technical assistance and analytical work. This 



includes both recently completed and ongoing activities, with strong collaboration with other 

development partners. 

This operation is a key component of the CPS for FY14-17. The CPS discussed by the 

Board in September 2013 includes three pillars: (i) Increasing competitiveness; (ii) En hancing 

human capital and minimizing social risks; (iii) Promoting a green, clean, and resilient 

Moldova. The DPO operation will directly support the first pillar of the CPS, improving 

economic competitiveness. It will also contribute to the second pillar (minimizing social risks) 

by strengthening the efficiency of the social assistance system. In addition, reforms aiming at 

making public expenditure more efficient and equitable support the cross -cutting governance 

theme of the CPS. 

 Tentative financing 

Source: ($m.) 

Borrower/Recipient 0 

International Development Association  17.8 

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 27.2 

 Total 45 

 Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

The reform program supported by this operation builds on strong complementarily with 

other World Bank Group instruments in Moldova, including investment projects and 

analytical and advisory activities. The operation is complemented in each area by technical 

assistance and investment lending. TA in investment climate reform and competition policy 

has strongly informed the policy reforms in these areas. On the investment side, the 

Competitiveness Enhancement Project II, complements the DPO series with Regulatory 

Reform, SME Development and Access to Finance components. The World Bank Group’s 

Competition Policy Team provided technical assistance to the Competition Council to help 

implement the state aid registry. Reforms in the financial sector are also supported by the 

programmatic technical assistance. Reforms in public investment management are supported 

by technical assistance under the programmatic Public Expenditure Review and the Trust Fund 

for Strengthening Public Investment Management. In social assistance, the DPO complements 

the on-going Strengthening the Effectiveness of the Social Safety Net results-based SIL.  

 Risks and Risk Mitigation 

The overall risks to this operation are substantial. Key risks are: (i) political and 

governance; (ii) macroeconomic; (iii) sector policies and institutions and (iv) institutional 

capacity for implementation and sustainability. The overall risk rating level of the proposed 

DPO is substantial. To partially mitigate these risks, the Bank team has consulted with 

Parliamentarians as many proposed policy measures require parliamentary passage. In 

addition, the policy actions across all three pillars of this operation help increase transparency 

and promote good governance. Finally, development partners, including the International 

Monetary Fund and the European Commission remain engaged in policy dialogue, technical 

assistance, awareness campaigns and financing (including three-year IMF EEF program  

 Poverty and Social Impacts (PSI) and Environmental Aspects 

The policies and reforms supported by the operation are expected to have positive 

distributional and gender impacts and thus help reduce poverty and promote shared 



prosperity. Pillar C will make fiscal policy more equitable and efficient and therefore have a 

direct effect on poverty reduction and the promotion of shared prosperity. Pillars A and B will 

contribute to the twin goals indirectly by helping provide opportunities for business growth, 

supporting fair and transparent institutions and improving the functioning of financial markets, 

thereby enabling higher growth. No measure is expected to have negative distributional or 

gender impacts. Measures under pillar A are expected to promote employment growth in 

sectors that have a high share of women’s employment such as agriculture (which accounts for 

27.3 percent of women’s employment) and services, where the largest share of employed 

women works. 

Among the measures expected to have a direct positive impact on poverty, the measures 

to increase the inclusion of small farms in the agriculture support program are expected 

to be pro-poor and to contribute to strengthen the livelihoods of the rural poor.  According 

to the 2011 agricultural census overall most corporate subsidy recipients are large farms, with 

30 percent of all corporate farms receiving subsidies against 7 percent of individual farms. For 

both individual and corporate farms, the share of subsidy recipients is slightly lower among 

female-headed than male-headed farms. Redirecting resources to small farmers is the more 

important considering the high incidence of poverty in rural areas vis a vis urban ones (14.5 

percent versus 1 percent in big cities and 5.7 percent in small towns), and the particularly high 

incidence of poverty among farmers and agricultural workers (12.5 and 13.9 percent 

respectively).  

The measures aimed at facilitating the use of movable collateral, based on international 

experience, can be expected to benefit smaller firms in the service sector which have 

limited fixed assets, and therefore have a positive (if small) distributional impact.  The 

cogency of the constraints faced by smaller firms in accessing credit is illustrated by the 20 13 

Enterprise Survey which indicates that over a third of firms with fewer than 20 employees, and 

in particular those managed by women, that applied for a loan were rejected. To the extent that 

these measures extent to agricultural enterprises the poverty reducing impact of these measures 

will be amplified (about 6.5 percent of the poor lives in households engaged in entrepreneurial 

activities outside of agriculture, but the share rises to 23 percent when agriculture is included). 

The parametric changes in the Ajutor Social social assistance program of last resort have 

explicit positive pro-poor and gender impact. Indeed, the rationale for the changes is to stop 

the erosion of the potential beneficiary base of the program. By directly supporting the income 

of a significant proportion of the poorest households in the country, these measures were 

estimated to reduce poverty by as much as 0.5 percentage points, with additional 

improvements in the livelihoods of the poor not captured by a decrease in poverty incidence  

(but in lower depth and severity of poverty). The proposed policy action is not expected to 

substantially modify the gender incidence of these programs, but as 57 percent of adult 

recipients of Ajutor social in 2015 were women, this measure is expected to have a positive 

gender impact.  

The withdrawal of the licenses from BEM, Banca Sociala, and Unibank and their 

liquidation has affected negatively the workers who lost their jobs and were not absorbed 

by other banks. The country’s regime of severance packages (growing with years of tenure in 

the job so that for example it would provide 9.6 weeks of salary for those employed for one 

year, and 18.6 weeks of salary for those with 10 years of tenure) was applied to cushion the 

shock on those who lost their job. Given wage levels in the banking sector (almost twice as 



high as the average for the economy) those severance packages were quite generous (the 

equivalent of 6.3 times the poverty line for those with one year of tenure in the job and of 27 

times the poverty line for those with ten years of tenure). In addition, because of their higher 

than average wages, workers in this group were not among the most poor and vulnerable (in 

2015 only 9 percent of workers in the financial sector were among the bottom 40 percent). 

Finally, there is at least anecdotal evidence that several employees from the banks that were 

liquidated were reabsorbed elsewhere in the sector. Other negative impacts of the bank 

liquidations, such as the losses for the depositors were fully compensated for during the 

liquidation process. 

The DPO environmental assessment (EA) and of the proposed priority actions shows most 

of them are either neutral or beneficial for the environment (see Annex 4). Measures in 

Pillar C to improve the public investment management framework and make investment 

subsidies in agriculture more efficient and equitable would eventually lead to better natural 

resource management, promotion of organic agriculture, energy efficiency and climate change 

adaptation technologies. Existing EA legal and administrative frameworks in the country is 

overall well developed and in compliance with good international practices. The PIM regulation 

requires environmental assessment for projects, and as such would help mitigate the potential 

environmental impacts. 



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Regional and Local Roads Connectivity (P163239) 

 
 

  
Jan 05, 2018 Page 1 of 17  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Jan-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA22919 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Albania P163239 Regional and Local Roads 
Connectivity 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 23-Jan-2018 25-Apr-2018 Transport & Digital 
Development 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance and 
Economy 

Albania Development 
Fund 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to selected agricultural and tourism centers, and to 
strengthen selected project municipalities’ capacity to manage their road assets 

 
Components 

Component 1 - Accessibility Improvement 
Component 2 - Capacity Building for Municipalities 
Component 3 - Implementation Management Support 
front end fee 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development   50.00  

Total Project Cost   50.00  
    
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
 
 




 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 
Albania has experienced rapid growth since 1990, rising into the ranks of middle-income countries in 2008. 
It emerged from the collapse of isolationist communism in the early 1990s as one of the poorest countries in 
Europe but since then has experienced a growth of nearly 6 percent per year. The rapid pace of growth helped 
the country narrow the per capita income gap with the rest of Europe from 18 percent of average European 
Union (EU) incomes in 1998 to 30 percent by 2012, and this fueled aspirations to join the EU. Growth 
successfully halved poverty from 25.2 percent in 2002 to 12.5 percent in 2008. However, the global and euro 
area crises in 2008 brought Albania's growth to a near standstill by 2012, and the country is struggling to 
recover, particularly given its historic ties to Europe’s poorer performing economies. The aftermath of the 
crisis presented an increase of the poverty rate, to around 14 percent in 2015, particularly in urban and coastal 
areas, along with rising unemployment affecting mostly youth and women. 

Recently, economic activity has picked up and the near-term economic outlook for Albania is positive. 
Economic growth is expected to accelerate to 3.8 percent in 2017 (from 3.4 percent in 2016 and 2.2 in 2015), 
supported by private investment and consumption. Investment is mostly linked to two large foreign direct 
investment-financed energy projects (the Trans Adriatic Pipeline and the Devoll hydropower plant), and 
consumption is supported by job creation and the easing of credit conditions. Net exports were helped by 
tourism and a recovering commodity market. Growth is projected to moderate to an average of 3.6 percent 
for 2018–2019 with completion of the two large energy projects and no other large projects planned.  

The Government remains committed to making deep structural reforms. Over the past years, the 
Government implemented a range of reforms, including improvements in Public Financial Management (PFM) 
(clearance of arrears, tax reforms), mitigation of fiscal risks from pensions and the energy sector, reduction of 
nonperforming loans, and improvements in doing business. Results were positive: growth picked up, the fiscal 
deficit declined, and the public debt started to fall. This provided a window of opportunity for advancing 
ongoing structural and fiscal reforms, to reduce macroeconomic risks and better support long-term growth. 

Albania applied for EU membership in 2009 and became an official candidate for accession in June 2014. 
This entails strong commitments in the transport sector, which manifest themselves in signing, with the 
European Commission, the Memorandum of Understanding for the Core Network creating the South East 
Europe Transport Observatory (SEETO)1 and in signing the Transport Community Treaty in July of this year. 
The treaty will help the Western Balkan countries align their national transport laws with those of the EU. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
Roads and highways are the predominant mode of land transport in Albania and provide essential 
connectivity for freight and personal mobility. Roads are one of the highest value public assets, estimated at 
about US$6 billion. The overall length of Albania’s road network is about 15,000 km; 4,000 km of national 

                                                           
1 The main aim of SEETO is “to promote cooperation on the development of the main and ancillary infrastructure on the South East 
Europe Core Regional Transport Network and to promote and enhance local capacity.” 


roads; and 11,000 km of regional, local, and urban roads.2 The Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy (MoIE), 
formerly the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure, is responsible for the policy and regulatory framework 
and technical standards. The Albania Road Authority (ARA) is responsible for managing the national road 
network and the municipalities are responsible for managing the regional and local roads. The Albania 
Development Fund (ADF) was established in 1993 with support from the World Bank, to implement regional 
and local roads projects mainly financed by international development partners.   

In 2015, Albania implemented significant administrative and territorial reforms consolidating 372 
communes and municipalities into 61 municipalities to increase the cost efficiency of local units so that they 
can provide better services. The new municipalities consolidated the responsibilities from the previous levels 
of local government—municipalities, communes, and regional councils—each of which was administering 
road networks within their jurisdiction, respectively, within city/town boundaries, within commune 
boundaries, and regional roads in regional council areas. Within the current regional and local road network, 
the function comprises (a) regional roads that connect groups of villages to the national road network or with 
main administrative centers of a municipality and (b) local roads that provide transport links between villages 
and farms. 

The infrastructure planning and prioritization process still has some way to go to provide transparent and 
economically efficient outcomes. With support from the World Bank, progress has been made by the 
Government in developing Medium-term Budget Plans (MTBPs) 2015–2017 to prioritize higher impact new 
investments. A framework that is more aligned with the budget realities is slowly emerging and more fiscal 
discipline is applied at all levels to avoid accumulation of arrears in the road sector. Under the proposed 
Regional and Local Roads Connectivity Project (RLRCP), a rigorous prioritization approach has been formulated 
for the selection of project roads which target investments that complement productive sectors of the 
economy and particularly in agriculture and tourism. This process provides an example for investment 
prioritization, transparency, and governance at a local level. 

Maintenance of the road network has been systematically underfunded, undermining the sustainability of 
the sector. The ongoing Results-based Road Maintenance and Safety Project (RRMSP) is addressing highest 
priority maintenance needs of 4,000 km of national roads while the proposed RLRCP will support the asset 
management of regional and local roads under the control of municipalities. 

The regional and local network is in bad condition overall, with more than 50 percent of network 
categorized in poor condition, 30 percent in fair condition, and less than 20 percent in good and very good 
condition. Some sections are impassable for parts of the year, thus restricting access to essential public 
services of health and education, as well as to economic centers. As of 2016, the maintenance expenditures 
for regional and local roads was allocated at approximately 300 Euro per km per year,3 which is extremely 
low and can only cover the routine maintenance, with no allowance for periodic maintenance or 
improvements. Investments and maintenance of regional and local roads are financed by local taxes 
combined with unconditional grant transfer from the central government. The poor condition of roads is a 
manifestation of the weaknesses in the municipalities planning, implementation and/or monitoring 
capacities.    

The Government of Albania (GoA) has taken large strides in improving conditions of the regional and local 
         

road network in the past decade but more work is necessary. ADF implemented a Rural Road Program, during 
the period 2008–2016, with World Bank support which crowded in US$386 million in financing from IFIs. The 
program improved1,200 km of rural roads in 12 regions and 61 municipalities which improved the mobility of 
over 2 million people. The World Bank’s engagement through the Secondary and Local Roads Project (SLRP), 
from 2008 to 2013, was evaluated as highly satisfactory which is an important milestone. The program was 
indeed highly successful, exceeding its developmental and implementation outcomes while recognizing there 
is still room to consolidate the e network improvements in a sustainable manner to enable growth in the 
agricultural and tourism sectors. 

The existing condition of regional and local road network is not able to serve the emerging tourism industry4 
and hinders the development of the agricultural sector.5 Over the past few years, the GoA has developed key 
strategic instruments including the National Territorial Development Strategy and the Coastal Management 
Strategy that provide a vision for the development of Albania over the next 15 years (2015–2030). These 
strategies highlighted a number of challenges which include improved road connectivity and the need to 
invest in municipal capacity to improve tourism destination management. The on-going Integrated Urban and 
Tourism Development Project is addressing these issues in the South of Albania while the proposed RLRCP will 
support improved access to tourism development areas in the project road areas of Albania. 

In October 2014, the GoA approved the five-year Strategy for Rural and Agriculture Development, drawing 
upon the strategic planning approach used by the EU under its Common Agriculture Policy 2014–2020. One 
of the obstacles pointed out by the strategy is lack of market access for agricultural products through an 
appropriate network of national, regional, and local roads. Considering that in Albania the agri-food industry 
is responsible (directly and indirectly) for almost half the economy-wide jobs, improving market access 
through better road connectivity is critical for the development of the country. It is also important for 
productive inclusion of women, who represent half of those employed in the sector (the highest share of 
participation of women in agriculture in the Western Balkans) and 80 percent of informal employment in the 
sector.  

Road safety remains a major social and public health issue in Albania. Although the number of accidents has 
dropped in recent years, Albania still compares unfavorably with countries in the region or EU member states, 
with the World Health Organization estimated 15.1 fatalities per 100,000 population—while it is 11.9 in 
Montenegro, 9.1 in Greece, 7.7 in Serbia, 4.3 in Germany, 5.1 in France, and 2.9 in the United Kingdom.6 In 
response, the GoA aims to reduce the number of fatalities by 50 percent in 2020, in comparison to 2009.7 The 
GoA has increased its attention to road safety reforms, including the adoption of the Road Safety Strategy and 
Action Plan in 2011 and adoption of mandatory Road Safety audit8 for all new roads. The RRMSP is 
strengthening the capacity of the Inter-Ministerial Road Safety Council, introducing road safety audit training 

                                                           
4 Tourism is a significant contributor to the Albanian economy, with 8.4 percent of total GDP in 2016, and is forecasted to rise to 10.8 
percent by 2027. Its contribution to employment is also significant, directly supporting 85,500 jobs (7.7 percent of total 
employment) in 2016, and is estimated to grow to 120,000 jobs (10.1 percent of total employment) by 2025.  
5 Agriculture is the single largest contributor to GDP in the country (22 percent in 2015) and the largest employer (41 percent in 
2015). Agricultural productivity and the competitiveness of the sector are adversely affected by the fragmented and subsistence-
oriented supply base, poor enforcement of food safety standards, infrastructure deficiencies, including poor transport networks and 
access to markets and tourism hubs, among others.  

 
6 World Health Organization. 2015 “Global Status Report on Road Safety 2015.” 
7 Government Decision No. 125, February 23,  2011, on “Implementing Objectives for Improving Road Safety.” 
8 By Amendment to Article 71/, introducing “Road Safety Audit” to the Highway Code. Decision 815 in November  2011. 

accreditation courses, supporting media campaigns, and enhancing the Accident Information System. The 
RLRCP will build on these reforms and address road safety through improvements to regional and local road 
infrastructure. 

Better links from the regional and local road network to the national road network will complement 
envisioned improvements in the country’s trade and transport facilitation competitiveness which are being 
supported under the separate proposed Regional Trade and Transport Facilitation Project. Improved feeder 
and distribution links from the regional and local road network to the national network together will reduce 
cost of trade and transport, lower the cost of importing and exporting for goods and services including 
agriculture and tourism.  These two areas will be the focus of the proposed RLRCP. 

A major emergent issue affecting sustainability of the road sector is the road network vulnerability to 
climate changes and natural disasters. Floods in recent years have increasingly affected the infrastructure 
and consequently the access of population and farmers to markets which have been substantially disrupted. 
A World Bank-executed Technical Assistance (TA) funded by the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and 
Recovery (GFDRR) is starting to address the issue of vulnerability of the road network and how to improve 
road asset management. Implementation of the TA outcome will be implemented as one of the components 
of the proposed RLRCP. 

In recent years, several IFIs have supported road sector investments and reforms in Albania. Several IFIs 
including the World Bank, European Commission, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(EBRD), European Investment Bank (EIB), and Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) are the main partners 
supporting the GoA including: (i) improvement of planning and budgeting process, (ii) introducing better 
management practices to avoid future arrears, (iii) deepening ARA reforms , and (iv) providing financing for 
priority projects. Bilateral partners including the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Agence Francaise de Developpement (AFD) and the 
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) are involved in supporting the new municipalities to 
capacity building, asset and resource management under their administration with a focus on water supply 
and sanitation, solid waste, and municipal financing. The proposed RLRCP presents an opportunity to develop 
an overall investment and policy framework for the regional and local roads sector that can be supported 
through the joint efforts of different development partners. In this context, the EBRD is currently in discussions 
with GoA to match the World Bank financing with a further US$50 million loan for a parallel operation. 

Gender gap. Gender gaps in construction and transport sectors, where less than 5 percent and 17 percent of 
all employed respectively, are women, are very substantial. Therefore, promoting women’s economic 
opportunities as part of the efforts to reverse poverty trends and boost shared prosperity are part of the 
project objectives. A separate TA funded by the State and Peace Building Fund (SPBF) administered by the 
World Bank will be looking into opportunities in this regard. The results from this TA will be implemented 
through the proposed RLRCP. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to selected agricultural and tourism centers and to strengthen 
selected project municipalities’ capacity to manage their road assets
 

Key Results 
 

• Number of agricultural and tourism centers connected by improved project roads 
 

• Reduced travel time on project roads 
 

• Demonstrated better asset management capacity by selected municipalities through adoption of 
Municipal Transport Investment and Maintenance Plan. 

 
D. Project Description  

 
The Albania RLRCP is expected to be financed by an IBRD loan of US$50 million. The RLRCP will focus on the 
role that improved roads can play in enabling connectivity driven economic gains, particularly in the 
agricultural and tourism sectors, both key drivers of growth and employment in Albania. More specifically, 
the proposed RLRCP will support tourism development through improving road access to existing and 
potential tourism destinations and providing quality tourism-friendly amenities (for example, parking lot for 
tourist bus, viewpoints) and signage along the roads in the project areas. It will also support the integration 
of agricultural producers to agri-food value chains and market participation, particularly for women who make 
up the majority of the workforce in agriculture. 

To achieve these overarching goals and set an example for investment prioritization at the municipal level, 
a rigorous prioritization approach has been formulated in the RLRCP road selection. The selection of project 
roads was done through a two-step prioritization process including the development of a long list of 1,400 km 
candidate roads based on consultations between the ADF and 61 municipalities and a short list of 200 km 
candidate roads using multi-criteria analysis, considering tourism destinations, agriculture potential, 
beneficiary population, and economic efficiency indicators. The selection process reflects the priority from 
the municipalities as well as the GoA’s vision on rural roads investments that support tourism and agriculture. 
This approach also allows for easy scale-up to a program for the GoA, municipalities, and other developmental 
partners to implement. 

The RLRCP will include capacity building TA in support of the municipalities to improve management of road 
assets and strengthen links between roads, improved agricultural market access, and tourism development 
plans where they exist. The RLRCP is designed to address the sustainability of road maintenance at the 
municipal level which is a significant challenge following the transfer of local and regional road assets to the 
municipal level. The RLRCP is also designed to address road safety issues in regional and secondary roads in 
the selected municipalities to provide safer and sustainable infrastructure. 

In addition, the project will implement action plans on ways to promote climate resilience and women’s 
economic opportunities in regional and local roads in Albania as follows:  

• Climate Resilient Road Assets for Albania: Albania’s vulnerability to climate change and natural 
disasters, for example, flooding, landslides, and earthquakes, within the road sector, is being analyzed 
under a separate Technical Assistance and its outcome will inform the prioritization of investment to 



provide more sustainable and resilient road assets. The TA outcomes will be incorporated into the 
RLRCP designs of specific road sections.  Improved regional and local roads at time provide an 
alternative to the national road network critical links during extreme weather events. The TA will also 
include recommendations to adjust the design standards for regional and local roads and apply them 
to the project roads. 

• Promoting Woman’s Employment in Road Sector in Albania: the capacity of local stakeholders to 
reach out and increase women’s inclusion and participation in road maintenance programs is being 
analyzed under a separate TA. The outcome will consider policy options to provide support to 
contractors that explore opportunities to promote women’s employment in high skilled jobs in their 
respective workforce.  The focus will be on more and better jobs.  
 

The project will finance the following components. 

Component 1. Accessibility Improvement (Total cost US$47.03 million; IBRD US$47.03 million) 

This component will finance the rehabilitation of regional and local roads; consultancy service for designs, civil 
works supervision, and technical and road safety audits; and road safety initiatives.  

• Subcomponent 1.1. Climate resilient road rehabilitation works (Total cost US$45.83 million). This 
subcomponent will finance the rehabilitation of about 50 km of regional and local roads within 5 to 6 
municipalities. The roads will be designed according to Albanian standards with particular attention to their 
climate resilience (such as to flooding and landslides) given the vulnerability of the network. As a first-year 
program, three project roads in three municipalities, totaling 40 km, have been selected based on further 
surveys and a rigorous multi-criteria analysis on the short-listed 200 km of roads. The remaining roads will be 
identified and prioritized during implementation. Where roads serve tourism areas or pass through urban 
areas, attention will be given to footpaths, bicycle paths, safety improvements, orientation signage, and 
aesthetic considerations. In addition, new bike lanes and sidewalks will be build, to encourage the shift to 
cleaner modes of transport. This subcomponent will also finance all necessary designs, civil works supervision, 
and technical and road safety audits, although the designs of the first-year program were already financed by 
the GoA.  

• Subcomponent 1.2. Road Safety Initiatives (Total cost US$1.2 million). This subcomponent will 
consist of identification of potential road safety interventions on regional and local roads that are not included 
in Subcomponent 1.1 but within the project municipalities. Identification efforts shall include both road risk 
mapping using available crash data and a road safety inspection of sections linked to Component 1.1 roads. 
These interventions will address accident blackspots and include traffic calming measures, footpaths, crash 
barriers and junction design. 

Component 2. Capacity Building for Municipalities (Total cost US$0.85 million; IBRD: US$0.85 million) 

This component will build capacity in the project municipalities’ to manage their transport system and road 
assets in a sustainable way and to maximize the impacts of improved accessibility on agricultural production 
and tourism potential. It will develop standard approaches that will be implemented in a few municipalities 
in this project but can subsequently be rolled out more widely. The following activities are envisaged: 

• Subcomponent 2.1. Municipal Transport Capacity Development for all Participating Municipalities 
(Total cost US$0.45 million). This subcomponent will focus on developing municipal systems for road 
maintenance and road planning following the recent transfer of road assets to the municipal level. It will: (i) 
assess municipalities capacity, local planning instruments and processes for road planning and maintenance 
and public transport planning, (ii) develop recommendations for addressing weaknesses, and (iii) provide 
training based on the recommendations. The focus will be on road maintenance and will include support on 
programming, budgeting, sustainable financing for road rehabilitation and maintenance priorities, asset 
management and maintenance execution. Public transport planning will extend to public parking and bus 
terminals, and safety measures. The subcomponent will also finance the preparation of a standard service 
level agreement contract for maintenance between the municipalities and the service provider and will 
provide training to the municipalities on its use.  

• Subcomponent 2.2. Linking Farmers to Markets (Total cost US$0.20 million). This subcomponent will 
support implementation of the recently approved 100 villages program. It will provide technical support for 
linking agricultural producers to local demand, including through local markets and tourism centers. The focus 
will be on production areas adjacent to the road infrastructure supported by the project. The subcomponent 
will provide an assessment of potential activities that could be financed through the grants available under 
the 100 villages program or other development partner programs. Potential activities include  supply chain 
activities for key agricultural products; recommendations for alleviating impediments in connecting roads, 
warehouses, harvesting facilities, regulations; developing collection zones; and promoting “Eat Albania” 
restaurants. This subcomponent will also increase the World Bank’s evidence base for supporting women 
smallholder farmers and women-led agriculture small and medium enterprises (SMEs) to start and/or enhance 
their participation in agri-food value chains in Albania; analyze the barriers that women face in accessing 
markets, in general, but particularly in light of the new business opportunities that the project is hoped to 
deliver; and recommend the ways to address them.9 

• Subcomponent 2.3. Managing for Tourism Growth (Total cost US$0.20 million). As above this 
subcomponent will support implementation of the recently approved 100 villages program. It will provide 
technical support to promote agro-tourism in the project municipalities. The subcomponent will provide an 
assessment of potential activities that could be financed through the grants available under the 100 villages 
program or other development partner programs. The subcomponent will also provide technical support to 
concerned municipalities to plan for this growth and mitigate any possible environmental and social impacts. 
Where appropriate support may also be given to steer public and private investments in tourism related 
infrastructure and services.        

Component 3. Implementation Management Support (Total cost US$2.0 million; IBRD: US$2.0 million) 

This component includes incremental operational cost of the ADF, development and maintenance of 
Geographic Information System (GIS) and prioritization database for regional and local roads, midterm 
evaluation, and capacity-building initiatives for the ADF. It will also include the implementation of a Project 
Impact Assessment to assess the project’s impacts on key social, transport, agriculture, and tourism indicators. 
This is similar to the approach used by ADF in the previous Rural Road Program using financing from the 
development partners and outsourced expertise.    

                                                           
9 The project scope and available budget will likely not allow for addressing most of the recommendations resulting from the gender 
analysis of this subcomponent. Still, in light of the large gender gaps in agriculture and the focus that the CPF rightly puts on them, 
the team considered it important to integrate gender analysis as part of the envisaged study. The recommendations will be provided 
to the client and will also be used to inform the World Bank’s future activities.  

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

The project will be implemented over four years and seven months by the ADF, which has strong experience 
and track record as an implementing agency of road projects financed by the World Bank and other 
development partners since its inception in 1993. A Project Management Team (PMT) will be established 
within the ADF, staffed by its own personnel, which will also coordinate with representatives of the respective 
municipalities. The PMT will manage project activities, such as procurement, social impact assessments, 
safeguard functions, monitoring and evaluation, and so on. When necessary, the project management 
function will be supported by consultants. A budget for such operating costs has been allocated in Component 
3. 

It is recognized that the participation of municipalities is critical during both project preparation and 
implementation. During the project preparation, the ADF has worked very closely with municipalities in the 
prioritization exercise, and several consultations with municipalities and local communities have taken place 
during the preliminary designs of the project roads. Before starting the civil works, an Investment Agreement 
and a Function and Maintenance Agreement will be signed by the municipalities, defining duties that 
municipalities must carry, e.g. maintenance requirement, after the project roads are handed over. The ADF 
will monitor the compliance of these agreements. When procuring and implementing capacity building 
activities, municipalities will provide ADF with inputs to TOR and sign off outputs.  

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as Category B.  Under Component 1, the project will finance the rehabilitation and/or 
reconstruction within the right-of-way of regional and local roads in selected municipalities. This Component will also 
finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of regional and 
local road network.  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Additional impacts might be expected due to increased traffic on rehabilitated roads, however the project will under 
Component 1 finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of 
regional and local road network. In addition, the rehabilitation works itself financed under the same component will 
also support improving the road safety aspects in project roads, and as such are expected to have long-term positive 
social impacts. 
 
 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will finance rehabilitation of priority regional roads across the municipalities. Construction will 
mainly occur within the existing right-of-way, and the estimated cumulative length of project road segments 


is 50 km. Three project roads were selected for implementation in the first year, and are located in Shkoder, 
Pogradec and Fier municipalities. There is no geographical focus for the remaining roads to be financed. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Bekim Imeri, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Natasa Vetma, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project is categorized as category B and not 
expected to have significant or irreversible 
environmental impacts given the rehabilitative 
nature of works to be financed.  Anticipated civil 
works will primarily entail rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of rural roads.  Potential negative 
environmental impacts may include, but not limited 
to: (i) temporary construction -related effects on 
noise, dust, and air quality; (ii) temporary localized 
water quality impacts resulting from possible 
drainage and sewage pollution; and (iii) temporary 
changes in access to, and the use of, public spaces 
during construction. The exact project locations are 
still not known as the prioritization of rural roads is 
still ongoing. For that reason, preparation of 
Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) is 
proposed prior to appraisal. ESMF is prepared to 
facilitate screening, assessment, and management of 
environmental and social issues for activities to be 
taken up by the project in subsequent years. The 
ESMF ensures preparation of appropriate and World 
Bank safeguard policy-compliant safeguard 
instruments during project implementation. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Some of the rehabilitation works are envisaged in 
nature protected areas and natural habitats. For that 
reason, the ESMF defines procedures for identifying 
and managing subprojects affecting natural habitats. 
No new construction will be allowed in nature 


protected sites, or significant natural habitats, but 
only rehabilitation of the existing roads. In addition, 
no activities will be allowed in or in proximity of 
critical habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project will not have any impacts on forests 

Pest Management OP 4.09 No 

The project is not expected to trigger pest 
management policy. The investments will not 
promote or increase the use of the pesticide. 
Although the project will finance solely roads 
rehabilitation, the ESMF provides guidance for use of 
herbicides for roads maintenance. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

The project is not expected to trigger OP 4.11. The 
investments will be focused on rehabilitation of 
existing roads. Nevertheless, due to the countries 
cultural richness, during the earthworks chance finds 
might be possible. For that reason, ESMF includes 
provisions on chance finds and required 
practices.For each such subproject, the ESIA and 
ESMP will be prepared, prior reviewed by the World 
Bank environmental specialist, and 
cleared/consulted with the Albanian Agency for 
Protected areas (or relevant environmental 
authorities). 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No Not relevant 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will finance rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of rural roads. Roads connecting 
villages with the regional centers, touristic/cultural 
sites and agricultural fields. Given the linear nature 
of the works the land-take impacts will be minor and 
linear, adjacent to the existing road. Thus there will 
be small land taken. Displacement of households or 
businesses is not expected either, nor any impact on 
livelihoods. Given that the project is a rehabilitation 
of existing roads, there will be no need for access 
roads, thus it is not expected to address associated 
land-take cases. To address the social safeguards 
instrument, the borrower will prepare Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) that will guide the land take 
activities during the whole cycle of the project 
implementation. If for any sub-project it is expected 
that the footprint will be known during the 
preparation phase of the project then the borrower 
will prepare site specific abbreviated or full fledge 
(depending of the impact) Resettlement Action Plan. 

 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No Not relevant 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project activities will not have impact on 
international waterways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Not relevant 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project has been classified as Category B.  Under Component 1, the project will finance the rehabilitation and/or 
reconstruction within the right-of-way of regional and local roads in selected municipalities and short new segments 
only where they present natural continuation / connection. Under the same component, the project will also finance 
and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of regional and local road 
network. This implies that the project will possibly have some adverse environmental impacts; however, these would 
be site specific and would not be significant nor long-term. For the project to remain category B, ESMF defines 
following environmental criteria for eligible subprojects: a) category A sub projects will not be financed; b) for sub 
projects in nature protected sites, or significant natural habitats, only rehabilitation of the roads would be allowed and 
no new construction. No activities would be allowed in or in proximity of critical habitats; c) New construction should 
be limited and allowed only in some specific cases for example where segments are missing or alignment of a section 
that is currently particularly difficult of dangerous; d) The construction, reconstruction or rehabilitation of roads on 
existing right of way would be allowed only in form of one or two lane roads. 
Some of the rehabilitation works are envisaged in the nature protected areas and natural habitats. For that reason, 
the ESMF defines procedures for identification and managing subprojects affecting natural habitats. No new 
construction would be allowed in nature protected sites, or significant natural habitats, but only rehabilitation of the 
existing roads. In addition, no activities would be allowed in or in proximity of critical habitats. For each of such sub 
projects ESIA and ESMP would be prepared, priory reviewed by WB environmental specialist and cleared / consulted 
with the Albanian Agency for Protected areas (or relevant Environmental Authorities). For all supported TA activities, 
the TORs for these activities should include environmental and social considerations in line with the triggered 
safeguards operational policies. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Additional impacts might be expected due to increased traffic on rehabilitated roads, however the project will under 
Component 1 finance and implement safety works on improving signage, pedestrian crossings, line-marking, etc. of 
regional and local road network. In addition, the rehabilitation works itself will also support improving the road safety 
aspects in project roads, and as such are expected to have long-term positive social impacts. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
As the project will finance mainly rehabilitation of existing roads, no major alternatives were, nor will be considered. 
Some alternatives will be taken in consideration during design when considering roads width and possible new 
connections. All those alternatives will be examined in site specific environmental due diligence documents prepared 
during project implementation. The ESMF screening procedure will help guide the Client in ensuring that the site-

specific impacts are mitigated, that no additional safeguards policies are triggered and that no category-A works are 
financed 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Albanian Development Fund (ADF) will be implementing the project. ADF has experience in managing 
environmental and social impacts of World Bank-financed infrastructure investments and other infrastructure projects 
financed by international finance institutions. The ADF project team includes experienced environmental and social 
specialists.  
To comply, the ADF prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as Resettlement 
Policy Framework, satisfactory to the Bank, to guide the overall project as the exact subproject locations are still not 
known or are currently being assessed. The purpose of this ESMF is to guide the Environmental and Social Assessment 
process, i.e. to facilitate screening, assessment, and management of environmental and social issues for activities to 
be taken up by the project in subsequent years. Environmental due diligence documents envisaged by ESMF include: 
ESIA, ESMPs and ESMP checklists. In addition to ESMF, the Borrower prepared a sample Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment (ESIA) for Fier-Seman road rehabilitation. 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared parallel with the Environmental and Social Framework 
(ESMF)/ The documents were disclosed on the December 22th and the consultation held on January 4th . 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Major stakeholders are ADF and municipalities in which the projects will be implemented. ESMF documents was 
disclosed and publicly consulted prior to appraisal. ESMF with the call for public consultation was disclosed on the ADF 
website on December 22, 2017 and major municipalities participating in a project (paper or electronic) for two weeks. 
The ESIA for Fier-Seman road was disclosed on ADF website and in Fier municipality on January 5, 2018. In addition to 
the public call, the government and relevant non-governmental organizations were invited through official invitations 
sent out by the ADF. Public consultation meetings were held in Tirana (January 4, 2018r) and Fier (January 15, 2018). 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was disclosed and consulted parallel with the Environmental and Social 
Framework (ESMF) 
The similar procedure will be followed for site specific ESMPs during project implementation as defined by the ESMF. 
All due diligence documents will be disclosed on the ADF websites respectively, and hardcopy will be available at their 
premises as well in participating municipalities for at least two weeks following public consultation as per ESMF. 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Serbia: Competitive Agriculture Project (CAP) (P167634) 

 
 

  
Jan 08, 2019 Page 1 of 13  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Jun-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC25635 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Serbia P167634  Serbia: Competitive 
Agriculture Project 
(SCAP) (P167634) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Sep 02, 2019 Nov 21, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Water 
Management 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Improve market access for small and medium agricultural producers in Serbia 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 50.00 

Total Financing 50.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 50.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 50.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
Other Decision (as needed) 

 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Following years of recession and slow growth, the Serbian economy expanded by 1.8 percent, on average, over 
the previous three years (2015–2017), while a stronger growth of 3.5 percent was estimated for 2018. Over the previous 
three years, growth started to recover on the back of higher investment (average annual growth of 8.3 percent) and strong 
growth of exports (up 10.7 percent annually in real terms). Consumption recovered as well, but at a slower pace (at 1 
percent annually in real terms). Growth of the industry and services sectors contributed most to the overall growth of the 
economy over the previous three years, while agriculture had a negative contribution to growth in 2015 and 2017. For 
2018, growth was broad-based with all three major sectors growing faster than last year. As a result, the growth in 2018 
reached 4.2 percent. The medium-term growth projections depend crucially on deeper and timelier structural reforms 
and progress with European Union (EU) accession. 
 
2. The Government of Serbia (GOS) has implemented a successful fiscal adjustment but economic vulnerabilities 
remain. In 2014, the GOS adopted an ambitious fiscal consolidation and structural reform program supported by the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. In the short term, the program focused on the control of 
aggregate wage and pension expenditures, improvements in tax administration, and reductions in subsidies to state 
owned enterprises. The implementation of these measures led to the reduction of budget deficits in 2015–2016 and 
budget surplus of 1.2 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2017 and 0.5 percent of GDP in 2018, underpinned by 
strong revenue collection and lower than planned public spending ensuing, among others, from the interest payment 
savings and under-execution of public investment. As a result of prudent fiscal policies, public debt continues to decline 
and stood at 54.3 percent of GDP (at the end of December 2018), and is expected to continue declining during 2019, albeit 
at a slower pace. However, the country remains vulnerable to spillovers from regional developments and market volatility, 
thus ensuring fiscal sustainability and supporting private sector development, growth, and formal employment are 
important for Serbia’s economic performance in the long term. 
 
3. Over this same period, the prospects for accession to the EU provided an impetus for a broad spectrum of 
reforms. In November 2007, Serbia initiated a Stabilization and Association Agreement with the EU. In 2012, it was granted 
an EU candidate status. Since the formal start of the accession negotiations in 2014, progress has evolved largely following 
its predicted trajectory. As of December 2018, Serbia opened 16 out of 35 chapters of the EU’s Acquis Communautaire, of 
which two are provisionally closed. 
 
4. Regional disparities of living standards are evident. There is a high degree of variability of living standards within 
the country, with 25 percent of the population of Serbia (close to 1.8 million people) being at risk of poverty. Municipalities 
in the Southern and Eastern part of Serbia have high poverty incidence as compared to the rest of the country, with risk 
of poverty rates ranging between 13 and 63 percent within these regions. Better understanding of these geographic 
disparities can help the Government of Serbia design and target policies and programs to support growth, jobs, poverty 
reduction and social inclusion.   
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context1 
 
5. Agriculture plays an important role in the economy of Serbia. Agriculture is the third largest sector, accounting 
for around 6 percent of GDP and 19 percent of formal employment, and the most important export sector, representing 
23 percent of total exports. The impressive growth of exports of both primary and processed food products provides 
evidence of the competitiveness of Serbian production in international markets and of significant potential to further 
leverage the sector’s growth to create jobs and income. From 2005 to 2016, the country’s exports of primary food and 
beverage products increased 148 percent and of processed food products increased 83 percent. In 2016, Serbia 
accumulated an agricultural trade surplus of US$650 million in primary products and of US$525 million in processed food 
and beverage products. 
 
6. Agriculture is undergoing a process of structural transformation towards a modern agri-food system. Primary 
agriculture, an important source of income and employment in the past, has diminished its contribution to the rapidly 
diversifying economy of Serbia. The declining share of primary agriculture in GDP and employment signals a process of 
transformation that provides ample opportunities for developing a modern, dynamic and more competitive agri-food 
system, able to generate better jobs up and downstream and improve income and livelihoods in the rural space. 
Improvements in labor and land productivity have contributed towards the expansion of agricultural output in Serbia. This 
is important as it leads to an increase in the supply of raw materials at lower costs to agri-processors, which in turn 
supports a much larger scale of operation, promotes horizontal integration, and reduces overall costs, all factors that 
increase the competitiveness of the whole agri-food system, as the country prepares for EU accession. Improving 
productivity is more than just raising yields and decreasing costs; it is also about raising food quality, moving into higher 
value products by using improved technology and practices2. 
 
7. Sector growth is geographically differentiated and narrow based in terms of composition of production. Growth 
patterns in agriculture are influenced by regional disparities in sector performance and composition, with a positive sector 
growth in the Northwestern parts of the country and contraction of production in Southeastern Serbia. The autonomous 
province of Vojvodina, in the North, is the key driver of agricultural output in Serbia, with 43 percent contribution to 
national agricultural GDP (in 2014) with large scale production of commodities. Between 2003 and 2013, crop output in 
Serbia expanded, mainly due to increased production in Vojvodina, as the other three regions recorded only a marginal 
expansion or even a decline (South and East Serbia). Livestock output declined over the same period, with all regions, 
except Vojvodina, recording contraction rates between 24 percent (Sumadija and West Serbia) and 33 percent (South and 
East Serbia). In the same period, livestock output in Vojvodina increased by around 13 percent.  
 
8. Despite regional comparative advantages, structural factors underpin the regional disparities. There are 
important structural limitations to agriculture in Serbia - very small and fragmented land holdings, ageing and declining 
farm labor force, low efficiency and productivity, low use of technology, high labor intensity, low financial liquidity and 
capital availability for investment (especially for smallholders) and outdated production management practices. Despite 
all of these, economic opportunities exist in rural areas. Cereals, vegetable oils and edible fruit have historically driven 
growth of agricultural production and exports, with Vojvodina’s larger producers benefiting the most. Only one percent 
of the farms in Serbia have 50 hectares or more of land and most of them are in Vojvodina3, while farmers who own less 

                                            
1 This section borrows from the World Bank Group Sector Study “New Opportunities and Old Constraints: The Context for Agriculture Sector 
Development in Serbia” by Garry Christensen (2016) as well as from a recently completed Agriculture Public Expenditure Review by Demetris 
Psaltopoulos and Svetlana Edmeades. 
2 World Bank. 2019. Harvesting Prosperity: Technology and productivity Growth in Agriculture”.  
3 Only one percent of farms in South Serbia cultivate more than 50ha of land, while in Vojvodina, 10 percent of farms cultivate more than 50ha of 
land.  



than 5 hectares of land account for 78 percent of all holdings and 25 percent of the total cultivated area in Serbia and are 
concentrated in the South and East Serbia.  
 
9. Broadening the scope for sector growth to include small and medium scale producers may be key to sector 
transformation. Although fragmented farm structures are often perceived as a challenge to scale economies and 
competitiveness, with high transaction costs preventing the many small producers from engaging in markets, in the case 
of Serbia, recent public expenditure analysis shows that smallholders4 are the most technically efficient producers in the 
country and hence, supporting their development can improve sector growth. Hence, consolidation at the product level, 
through aggregation and economic clusters, may hold the key to development, enabling the specialization of small 
efficient units and their integration into broader value chains. Middle size farms, which are often seen as the drivers of 
growth in the sector, are found to be the worst performers in terms of technical efficiency in Serbia, posing a question on 
the adequacy of the enabling environment for their agricultural development. These producer segments also specialize in 
agricultural products that are not scale intensive yet can hold important value proposition and drive the generation of 
jobs and growth in rural areas. Improving the enabling environment to support the productive inclusion of small and 
medium scale producers can drive the process of structural transformation of agri-food systems in Serbia.  
 
10. Rethinking and redirecting policy instruments and incentives can increase the speed of sector transformation. 
Agricultural budget support has been aligned with the EU budget support framework, and a Directorate for Agrarian 
Payments has been established to administer national direct payments (subsidies) and rural development investments 
(both national and EU Instrument for Pre-Accession and Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD) grants). Subsidies and 
transfers dominate agricultural spending (2011-2017) and, on average, account for 82 percent of sector expenditure. They 
are found to negatively affect sector productivity and efficiency and are thought to contribute towards freezing the current 
dual farm structure. Emphasis on area and headage payments5 reduce the incentives to increase productivity, preserve 
farm structures dominated by smaller farms and do not contribute to the acceleration of the structural transformation 
process6. Further, coupled output subsidies distort the allocation of productive resources. When the above are combined 
with the low (at least until 2017) level of funds dedicated to rural development, including the provision of public goods 
(agricultural infrastructure, R&D, advisory services, etc.), it creates a policy framework which constrains farm restructuring 
and the potential of smaller and medium-sized farms, that currently dominate Serbian agriculture, to increase their size, 
modernize production systems, benefit from expanding markets and contribute to a competitive agri-food sector and to 
a vibrant rural economy. 
 
11. Despite ample EU resources, productive investments, through rural development grants, are underutilized. 
IPARD funds in the amount of EUR230 million (including national co-financing) have been allocated to Serbia for the 
programming period of 2014-2020 in annual instalments. Serbia has received accreditation for 2 of the 11 IPARD 
measures7. Although the scope of these measures is broad, actual number of beneficiaries is limited, with most small and 
medium scale producers not being able to take advantage of this productive support due to the complex application 
process and the requirement for upfront financing. A key constraint in the uptake of IPARD grant support is the complexity 
of the application process, due to the numerous requirements which applicants often can’t fulfill, added to limited capacity 
in the Directorate for Agrarian Payments for review and approval. In addition, a limiting factor is the requirement of an 
upfront payment of the full grant amount by the applicant, which assumes availability of financial resources, with 

                                            
4 In the context of Serbia, small producers are those with an economic size of up to 8,000 euros; medium producers are those with an economic size 
between 8,000 and 25,000 euros. 
5 Criticized for not relying on objective and valid baseline indicators, as well as the poor definition of eligibility criteria (Bogdanov et al., 2017) 
6 It is noted that leased agricultural land is excluded from farm support (Bogdanov, 2016). 
7 Accredited measures in 2018 are Investments in Physical Assets of Agricultural Holdings and Investments in Physical Assets for Processing and 
Marketing of Agriculture and Fisheries Products; 2 more are planned for accreditation in 2019 - Farm diversification and business development and 
Technical assistance; and 2 additional ones for 2020 – LIDER program for local development and organic production.  



reimbursement of 50 percent after all investment criteria have been fulfilled, ex post. This requirement alone makes IPARD 
grants difficult to access for the majority of small and medium scale producers in Serbia. 
 
12. National program resources can shift the sector equilibrium from low productivity to high value for small and 
medium scale producers in Serbia and encourage convergence of the National and EU programs over time. For rural 
development grants, boundaries are established between eligible beneficiaries of the national rural development program 
and those eligible to apply for IPARD support, based on either size or production potential. All producers not eligible for 
IPARD support, are eligible for national program support. Reaching out with national investment funds to the small and 
medium producers of Serbia, especially in the South and Southeast of Serbia, can improve these producers’ productive 
inclusion and competitiveness, and enable them to actively participate in the process of structural transformation of 
agriculture in Serbia and preparing them for EU accession.  
 
13. Improving financial inclusion for productive investments can stimulate broader private sector participation. 
While around two thirds of adults in rural areas in Serbia have accounts with financial institutions, only 14% of them have 
loans to operate, start or expand farm and small business activities. Most medium and larger farmers and medium/larger 
SMEs have access to finance as banks have the right expertise, systems and products to serve these agricultural segments 
profitably. However, smaller farmers have very limited access to bank financing and mostly rely on off takers and input 
suppliers to finance their inputs. This type of value chain financing does not cover longer term funding for equipment, 
machinery and is currently decreasing as these players try to re-focus on their core business. The long-term goal is the 
development of efficient, competitive markets, producing to EU standards which requires better inclusion of small-scale 
producers (among them women and youth) in modern supply chains, an increase in investments in machinery, equipment 
and knowledge as well as the modernization of processing and marketing. For this to be achieved, however, public funds 
are not sufficient resources and bank financing can play a catalyst role in the further development and competitiveness 
of the sector. 
 
14. A combination of targeted public incentives and private financing can improve sector productivity and 
competitiveness. A policy mix that focuses on the improvement of competitiveness and value addition capacity of the 
agri-food system in Serbia can have important sectoral and economy-wide growth effects by inducing positive spillovers 
to other economic sectors and contributing to employment, poverty reduction and economic prosperity of rural areas. 
The public expenditure analysis has shown that direct payments do not promote technical efficiency and productivity 
growth and slow down the structural transformation in Serbian agriculture. Reducing the direct payments envelope and 
significantly increasing the rural development one (including advisory and farm extension services and R&D) is therefore 
paramount for improving the performance of the sector. To enable that, a different set of financial mechanisms may be 
required, to enable small and medium scale producers to access finance and participate in productive decisions, such as 
matching grants8 and public guarantee funds that reduce the risk to producers and other financial institutions, hence 
stimulating financial and productive inclusion. At present, small farmers do not have financial records, do not have 
business plans, they find bank requirements challenging and, most importantly, they lack collateral. Matching grants and 
technical assistance (TA) can create the conditions for banks to finance investments of farmers that are not their typical 
clients. Matching grants can create the required equity for the banks and TA can ensure bankability of the business plan 

                                            
8 Matching grants are an instrument aimed at promoting private sector development which has been used extensively over the past years, in 
particular for agriculture development. A matching grant is defined as a one-off, non-reimbursable transfer to project beneficiaries, for a specific 
purpose, based on the condition that the recipient makes a contribution for the same purpose. These grants can be used for a variety of activities 
including technical assistance, investment in assets or financing of working capital. Total grant financing dedicated to agriculture reaches 650 million 
USD or almost twice the volume of those outside of agriculture. In addition, the proportion of matching grants projects supporting agriculture has 
significantly increased in the 2000s. Recent interest for this instrument to support agriculture might be due to growing concerns about other forms 
of support which distort financial markets such as interest rate subsidies, as well to the compatibility of such agricultural subsidies with World Trade 
Organization requirements.  




and prepare the client to approach the bank. Finally, if commercial banks require additional safeguards for their 
investments, they will be able to access credit guarantees to be soon provided by the Development Credit Authority 
(USAID Guarantee Program) and European Investment Fund (EIF) including risk sharing through a new IFC project. 
 
15. Greater resilience to climate and market risks can further boost the overall sector performance. The reliance on 
agricultural commodities increases Serbia’s exposure to price volatility, which added to the increasing number of extreme 
climatic events in Serbia (droughts and floods) further exacerbates agricultural growth volatility. Projected increases in 
temperatures and declines in precipitation will affect rainfed crops, which dominate Serbian agriculture. Production is 
concentrated in the north (Vojvodina), where crops are vulnerable to decreasing precipitation and increasing 
temperatures, primarily during the summer growing season. Rainfed maize may decline by as much as 58 percent due to 
reduced rainfall and higher temperatures in summer. Increases in temperature have already brought about increases in 
fungal diseases and pests that reduce crop production. Cereals and fruits are the most important agricultural products in 
terms of production area and economic output; fruit production is particularly vulnerable to spring frost, hail, extremely 
low winter temperatures, low precipitation and/or heavy rainfall events9. Hence, diversifying the sector base has 
important climate mitigation (reducing risks) and climate adaption (improving resilience) implications for the country.  
 
16. As Serbia advances in the process of sector transformation and alignment to EU acquis, the effectiveness of 
public service delivery becomes critical to improving sector performance. Serbia has committed to align its national 
agricultural policy to the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) of the EU by the date of accession. To this end, the country is 
required to have all the necessary systems in place to manage and receive funds from the EU and to make payments to 
beneficiaries in Serbia in accordance with EU rules and procedures. An Integrated Administration and Control System 
(IACS), along with other tools, are necessary for the efficient utilization and monitoring of support funds. Systems for 
monitoring results (and not only expenditures) will also be required by the reformed CAP, starting in 2020. EU membership 
unlocks significant financial assistance to farmers under the EU’s CAP, yet it also imposes stricter food safety and other 
trade-related requirements to agricultural production. Enhancements in digital approaches can improve targeting, 
efficiency of spending, food safety monitoring, as well as support the governance structure of the sector.  The innovation 
environment in Serbia would need to be strengthened and uptake of emerging digital technologies by farmers improved 
to help lower transaction costs and facilitate information access about best farming practices, inputs, prices, access to 
credit and markets. This will improve transparency, reduce innovation hurdles and support an enabling environment for 
productive and financial inclusion of agricultural producers in Serbia. 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 
17. The proposed project is consistent with the Serbia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period of FY16-
20. While the SCD identified agriculture as a priority sector for the twin goals, the CPF did not originally envisage an 
operation because of counterpart readiness. However, engagement with a new team at the MAFWM demonstrates a new 
strategic drive and opportunity to make an impact. Therefore, as part of the program update permitted under the PLR, 
the Bank decided to re-engage in this sector. Through productive investments targeting small and medium scale producers 
and strengthening the information systems of the agricultural sector, the project aims at increasing sector 
competitiveness, while providing economic opportunities in rural areas, as the country moves closer to EU membership. 
The Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the CPF identifies agriculture as one of the high priorities for the 
Government with an important dimension of shared prosperity. The project is also aligned with the strategic goals of the 
National Agricultural and Rural Development (NARD) strategy for 2014-2024: i) growth of production and income stability; 
ii) growth of competitiveness with adjustments to domestic and foreign markets requirements and technical-technological 


promotion of the sector; iii) sustainable management of resources and environment protection; iv) promotion of quality 
of life in rural areas and poverty reduction; v) efficient management of public policies and promotion of institutional 
framework for development of agriculture and rural development. 
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
18. To improve access to markets and information systems for agricultural producers in Serbia.  
 
This will be achieved through a) improving productivity of small and medium scale farmers by strengthening advisory 
and technical support; b) supporting market access of small and medium scale farmers (including finance and business 
planning capacity); c) improving government systems to strengthen the enabling environment for all agricultural 
producers (including capacity building for the Ministry, information systems, data platform). 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 

19. The project will achieve the following results: 
 

(i) Productivity10: Increase in gross value added per utilized agricultural area 
 

(ii) Competitiveness11: Increase in the share of production sold by project beneficiaries 
 

(iii) Financial inclusion12: Number of beneficiaries accessing commercial bank loans for their productive 
investments (disaggregated by gender)  
 

(iv) Use of information systems13: Number of unique users of the integrated information platform (disaggregated 
by gender) 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
A. Concept 
 
20. Scope: The project will support the Government of Serbia with the implementation of the National Agriculture 
and Rural Development Program. This will complement Serbia’s on-going efforts to align its national programs to the EU 
CAP programs. In particular, the project will provide financial and technical support to all productive investments in 
agriculture in Serbia through the national rural development program14 and will not participate in the financing of direct 
payments (subsidies). This delimits the scope of project interventions outside of all IPARD measures that the country has 
been accredited for or plans to be accredited for and puts it in the center of national rural development program.  
 

                                            
10 Improved on-farm productivity (use of better management practices, climate smart agriculture, etc.) 
11 Improved linkages between producers and buyers/markets (volume, quality and uniformity of production, value and volume of sales, market 
segmentation strategies, etc.; building entrepreneurial capacity of the production units) 
12 Improved access to finance to drive the process of value-addition on and off-farm (enable investments in equipment, small infrastructure, technical 
assistance, and other services that improve the competitiveness of the production units) 
13 Improved information systems for decision making at the level of the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) and 
information flow with agricultural producers 
14 In 2018, the program received 8,000 applications from small and medium scale producers.  

21. Beneficiaries: Small and medium scale agricultural production units (including producers, producer groups, 
agribusinesses/agro-processors that can provide direct link to smallholder farmers) that have or can have commercial 
focus and are not covered by accredited IPARD measures. Although large producers will not be directly targeted, the 
project will also benefit them with the enabling environment it will create through the improvements in information 
systems and the financial services provided. Small and medium size producers are defined by the economic size of holding 
expressed in euros of standard output. For the purposes of this project and the context of Serbia, small producers are 
those with an economic size of up to 8,000 euros; medium producers are those with an economic size between 8,000 and 
25,000 euros. 
 

 
Description 
 
22. The project activities are structured into three Components. Component 1 will focus on improving the productive 
and entrepreneurial capacity of small and medium farmers by supporting business and financial planning for productive 
investments, as well as supporting market access and strengthening sector competitiveness. Component 2 will focus on 
improving the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) to provide core public 
goods for improving sector performance. This includes establishing and information system aligned with EU CAP 
requirements to enable evidence-based policy making and monitoring of results, enhance market information for 
stakeholders and build capacity for regulatory roles aligned with EU CAP. Component 3 will focus on project management. 
 
23. By addressing sector needs at the level of producers (Component 1) and the MAFWM (Component 2), the project 
will support a broader policy reform process in the agriculture sector through: i) improved targeting of policy instruments 
to different typologies of producers, ii) strengthened enabling environment for investment for small and medium 
agricultural producers, by improving the delivery of services to these productive segments (advisory, financial, 
information, etc.), iii) improving the monitoring of public resources and their utilization, as well as sector performance. It 
is expected that this will bring about a significant shift in the utilization of public resources in agriculture from subsidies 
(direct payments) to rural development investments.  
 
 
Component 1: Improving the value-added of agriculture (US$35 million) 
 
24. The objective of this component is to improve the economic performance of small and medium agricultural 
producers in Serbia on- and off-farm. The component will support the building of entrepreneurial capacity of agricultural 
producers through the integration of production decisions with market requirements and technical and financial services. 
Activities will focus on improving land and labor productivity, broaden access to productive assets, technology, 
information, and credit, diversification of agricultural products, and access to markets, including traceability and 
differentiation strategies. Unlocking agricultural finance for productive investments, strengthening productive and 
entrepreneurial capacity of producers, developing short value chains and market linkages will stimulate economic 
activities in rural areas and can lead to the creation of jobs. It will also create capacity for better absorption of IPARD funds 
for improving the rural development of Serbia, while also strengthening alignment to EU CAP. 
 
25. The component is structured into two sub-components: (i) Improving entrepreneurial capacity – focusing on 
capacity building activities required to formulate business plans, investment decisions and financial support, from public 
and private sources; (ii) Improving productivity and competitiveness – comprising investments in equipment and technical 
assistance to support their implementation. The detailed description of the sub-components is provided below.  
 



Sub-component 1.1: Improving productive and entrepreneurial capacity (US$5 million) 
 
26. This sub-component will focus on technical assistance to producers, producer groups and agri-businesses for the 
formulation of business plans that normally bundle three key elements: i) investment in equipment, ii) working capital, 
and iii) technical assitance for productivity improvement and entrepreneurial capacity. The sub-component will finance 
the preparation and implementation of business plans for proposed investments, including: (i) business skills and 
organizational training for small-scale producers; (ii) preparation of subprojects, including information on financial cash 
flow as per bank requirements, including the formulation of matching grants15 for capital investments in equipment, 
machinery, processing units16, packaging, storage, etc., (iii) specific technical studies and consultancies that would 
contribute to the implementation and the execution of approved business plans; (iv) a communication strategy designed 
to raise awareness of and stimulate participation of the SME agribusinesses in the project; (v) support banks with 
developing methodologies suitable for assessing credit for the types of investments and beneficiaries of the project.  
 
27. The scope of the business plan will depend on the capacity of producers and the complexity of the sought 
investment. Activities will take place on- and off-farm. To enable greater participation of potential beneficiaries, emphasis 
will be placed on improving the entrepreneurial capacity of producers by providing technical assistance and seed capital 
for analysis of investment options. The business plans will also include public good/ compliance elemtns (environemntal 
and social aspects, food dafety compliance, etc.). Strict eligibility criteria will be set forth to enable the participation of 
small and medium producers. The selection and eligibility criteria and the governance and management aspects of the 
matching grants will be detailed in a Grant Operational Manual to be formulated during project prepration.  
 
Sub-component 1.2: Improving productivity and competitiveness (US$30 million) 
 
28. This sub-component will focus on improving the productivity and competitiveness of project beneficiaries through 
specific investments, as defined in the business plans and implemented through matching grants (defined in Component 
1). The total cost of the business plan depends on the type of investment, the amount of working capital and the scope of 
the technical assistance. This cost also varies by the productive activity and the typology of the producers. For example, 
in Montenegro (under the MIDAS project), the total cost for agricultural producers ranges between 10,000 and 70,000 
euros, while for agricultural processors it ranges between 50,000 and 250,000 euros. In Kosovo, the range for producers 
ranges between 10,000 and 100,000 euros, while for processors it is between 30,000 and 400,000 euros. The project will 
finance only a share of this cost (through a marching grant of typically 50%), as a one time incentive to leverage private 
investment, including own resources and/or credit. 
 
29. The sub-component will finance i) the use of good environmental and agricultural practices to improve on-farm 
productivity, ii) in on-farm inputs and equipment required for the optimizatoin of production and/or diversification, as 
well as technical advice for the use inputs, technologies, alternatives, etc., iii) support digital agriculture approaches to 
improve productivity on-farm and enhance linkages between producers and markets, iv) support compliance with food 
safety standards, traceability, geographic denomination of origin and other market-related activities as part of the 
improvement of the competitive position of beneficiaries; v) carry out market demand assessments to identify differential 
market potential for products; vi) support beneficiary participation in trade fairs and other events; vii) support the 
commercialization of agricultural products by improving access to medium-term finance, providing start-up capital for 

                                            
15 There is a strong public good argument for using matching grants – stimulate cross compliance (improving enviornmental outcomes), stimulate 
use of innovations, new technologies, development of skills, modernization, horizontal integration, financial inclusion. Through the project, capacity 
for the use of matching grants will be improved in the sector, which can lead to a consecutive better absorption of IPARD grants. 
16 Under IPARD grants, investment grants for processing facilities is only provided for new structures; national rural development program can provide 
investments for rehabilitation and upgrade of existent facilities.  



     

small- and medium-sized farms involved in productive partnerships, and by ensuring the availability of financing for value 
chain support. Considering the high risk of lending to small producers, the project will support the enabling environment 
for de-risking by working with existent public credit guarantee funds. There are various guarantee schemes applicable to 
Serbian agriculture and, in particular, the EIF and DCA17, which the project seeks to leverage as a risk mitigating mechanism 
for crowing-in private investment through lending by commercial banks.  
 
 
Component 2: Improving the capacity of MAFWM to support modern agriculture (US$10 million) 
 
30. The objective of this component is to improve capacity of MAFWM and related agencies to facilitate the enabling 
environment for improved sector performance through evidence-based policy making and provision of public goods, such 
as information systems and open data platforms. A digital platform for decision making18 will benefit all agricultural 
producers of Serbia, whether they apply for support through IPARD or national program or don’t. A unique registry 
system19 would be required to support decision making and to also support pension reform efforts in the country.   
 
Sub-component 2.1: Improving information systems 
 
31. This sub-component will support the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) to 
modernize its information systems and strengthen its decision-making capacity, through the improvement of hardware, 
software and human capacity for information support to the sector. Modernizing the information systems is critical in the 
process of alignment to EU CAP, including sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) delivery and monitoring, advisory information, 
land parceling (LPIS), paying agency data management, etc. In addition, the project will support a digital producer 
identification card (“one card”) to enable the better monitoring of the access to resources, support services and 
information by all farmers in the country. The project will finance the following: i) technical assistance to improve the 
coordination within and across existing information systems across Directorates and enhance delivery of information for 
decision making at different levels; ii) acquisition of hardware and software to improve the scope, functionality and 
compatibility of information systems and establish digital data collection and processing of current paper-based processes. 
 
32. The project will also assist the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) with technical 
assistance to develop capacity to assess the demand, structure, and modalities for agricultural Guarantee agency in Serbia, 
similar to these in other neighboring and EU countries, with the potential of establishing in the medium term such a 
guarantee agency (state-owned or PPP). Options to capitalize the guarantees would also be part of the assessment. 
 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Open data platform 
 
33. This sub-component will establish an open, public information platform where key information is accessible to all 
agriculture stakeholders. The project will finance the software, hardware and technical assistance required for the set-up 

                                            
17 Two public donor guarantee schemes with agricultural windows are expected to be available in early 2020 – European Investment Fund (EIF) 
(backed by EU funding) and the DCA (guarantee facility of USAID), still under negotiations with MAFWM – and can be tapped on by commercial banks 
in the first couple of years of project implementation. IFC is already engaged with the EIF. Although a public guarantee fund exists in Serbia (the 
Serbian Development Fund, SDF), it is weak and does not cater to agriculture. Hence, a capacity building (through a TA) activity may be warranted 
under the project to provide guidance on future needs by the public sector for unlocking private investment in agriculture. 
18 A PHRD grant on strengthening M&E capacity of MAFWM, implemented in parallel to this project, will support this platform thro ugh capacity 
building within the Ministry and technical assistance, as needed. 
19 For example, only farm household applying for IPARD grants are registered in the national farm registry (around 335,000), excluding a large number 
of agricultural producers. 


and functionality of the platform. Access to important production and market information, including weather variables, 
prices of key products, etc. is critical for on and off-farm decisions. This platform can also be a support system for advisory 
services in Serbia and can link to digital approaches on farm, ensuring a two-way communication on plan and animal 
health, and other risks that can constrain agricultural competitiveness. Maintaining the content and enabling public access 
to this platform is a key role that the Ministry can play in the enabling environment for agricultural sector transformation.  
 
34. A digital information platform can play an important role for the spatial tracking and connectivity of production 
and market demand, thus contributing to improved positioning of products, sales and overall competitiveness. In addition, 
by including weather and climate information modeling, the project could contribute to early warning systems, helping 
producers to better prepare and adapt to changing climatic conditions. The project will use existing digital agriculture tools 
and will collaborate with private sector IT companies for finetuning electronic delivery mechanisms for monitoring 
production, access to technical information, traceability of goods and identification of market opportunities.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5 million) 
 
35. This component will support the establishment of a project management team (PMT) in the Directorate of 
Agrarian Payments (DAP) and capacity needs related to project implementation, as well as project monitoring, including 
a comprehensive baseline, mid-term review and a final impact assessment of project investments.  
 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
The project is classified as Moderate Risk taking in account the low risk nature of the interventions, the limitations on 
implementation capacity, the application of environmentally friendly practices and new technologies, and the difficulty 
of enforcing workers’ rights in multiple SME agribusinesses. No adverse impacts such as involuntary land acquisition, 
impacts on community health and safety, on cultural heritage, are expected. Some of the project funded activities may 
include support to small scale community agriculture that is undertaken within areas under some level of environmental 
protection. The project will introduce new technologies and support improvement of technical knowledge and skills of 
beneficiaries on, amongst other, water and energy efficiency, pollution prevention and best practice use of herbicides 
and pesticides. The project’s anticipated social impacts are predominantly positive, such as increased income and 
employment in the agricultural sector as well as protection from climate related economic losses for farmers through the 
introduction of an early warning system. As labor informality is prevalent in the agricultural sector, the Borrower will 
prepare Labor Management Procedures to manage risks related to workers’ rights in project supported agribusinesses. 
The environmental and social screening criteria developed for the agricultural grant schemes and the credit guarantee 
fund will screen for relevant risks and apply mitigation hierarchy. 

 

 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 
Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Mar-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC19562 

 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017 

    

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official duties. I ts contents 
may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization. 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 

Project ID Lending Instrument Environmental Assessment 

Category 

Team Leaders 

P158364 Investment Project 

Financing 

B - Partial Assessment Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel 

Ghany 

Approval Date Bank / IFC Collaboration   

14-Nov-2017 No   

Practice 

Manager/Manager 

Senior Global Practice 

Director 

Country Director Regional Vice President 

Meike van Ginneken Guang Zhe Chen Qimiao Fan Annette Dixon 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 

 
The project development objectives are to improve the irrigation service and to strengthen farmer organizations in the 

irrigated areas of the Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme. 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA 

 

[ ✔ ] 

Counterpart 

Funding 

[    ] IBRD [ ✔ ] IDA Credit 

 

[    ] Crisis Response 

Window 

 

[    ] Regional Projects 

Window 

[    ] IDA Grant 

 

[    ] Crisis Response 

Window 

 

[    ] Regional Projects 

Window 

[    ] Trust 

Funds 

[    ] Parallel 

Financing 

 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

For Loans/Credits/Others (US$M) 

 

 

Total Project Cost :   65.00 

Financing Gap :    0.00 

Total Bank Financing :   65.00 

Of Which Bank Financing 

(IBRD/IDA): 
  60.00 

 

Financing Source Amount 

Borrower    4.00 

International Development Association 

(IDA) 
  60.00 

Local Farmer Organizations    1.00 

Total   65.00 

 
 

Borrower : Nepal 

Contact :  Title :  

Telephone No :  Email :  

 

 

Implementing 

Agency : 

Department of Irrigation 

Contact : Rajendra  Prasad Adhikari Title : Director General, Department of Irrigation 

Telephone No : 091561236 Email : rjkip@hotmail.com 

 

 
 

INSTITUTIONAL DATA 

 
Practice Area (Lead) 

 

Water 

 
 

Contributing Practice Areas 

 

Agriculture 



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 

 
Climate Change and Disaster Screening 

This operation has been screened for short and long-term climate change and disaster risks 

 
OPS Fina ncia l Interme diate Tabl e  

Private Capital Mobilized   Public Private Partnership   

Yes   No   

 
Gender Tag 

 

Does the project plan to undertake any of the following? 

 

a. Analysis to identify Project-relevant gaps between males and females, especially in light of country gaps identified 

through SCD and CPF 

 

Yes 

 

b. Specific action(s) to address the gender gaps identified in (a) and/or to improve women or men's empowerment 

 

Yes 

 

c. Include Indicators in results framework to monitor outcomes from actions identified in (b) 

 

Yes 

 
 

SYSTEMATIC OPERATIONS RISK- RATING TOOL (SORT) 

 
Risk Category Rating 

1. Political and Governance  High  

2. Macroeconomic  Moderate  



 
The World Bank PROJECT CONCEPT NOTE 
NP Modernization of Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme - Phase 2 (P158364) 

 
 

Jan 05, 2017   Page iv 
 

F
o
r 

O
ff
ic

ia
l 
U

s
e
 

O
n
ly

 

3. Sector Strategies and Policies  Moderate 

4. Technical Design of Project or Program  Moderate 

5. Institutional Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability  Substantial 

6. Fiduciary  Substantial 

7. Environment and Social  Substantial 

8. Stakeholders  Substantial 

9. Other   

10. Overall  Substantial 

 
 

PREPARATION SCHEDULE 

 
Preparation Schedule 

Milestone  Original Revised Actual 

AIS Sign off    Dec 06, 2015 

Concept Review Meeting  Apr 20, 2016 Mar 22, 2017 Mar 22, 2017 

Begin Appraisal  Jul 17, 2017 Sep 25, 2017  

Approval  Nov 14, 2017 Nov 14, 2017  

 
Expenditures 




B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Nepal is an under-developed country located in the Himalayan region, with harsh mountain 
topography except for its southern part consisting of a narrow strip of flat land called the Terai region.  The 
economy is largely agrarian-based, with low labor productivity.  The shares of agriculture, services and 
industry in GDP are around 32, 50 and 18 percent, respectively.  The per-capita GDP/yr is around US$700 
(FY16) with 24% of the population below the poverty line.   Nepal experienced its slowest growth in 14 years 
in FY2016.   Real GDP growth, which slowed to 2.7 percent in FY2015 because of a devastating earthquake, 
was further dragged down to 0.6 percent in FY2016 due to the sluggish post-earthquake reconstruction 
activities and the disruption in cross-border trade. 
 
2. The weak economic growth of the past two years has setback the steady reduction in poverty. 
Poverty headcount rate is estimated at 11.8 percent in FY2015, down from 15 percent in FY2010, but is 
projected to increase slightly to 11.9 percent in FY2016, measured at the $1.90 a day line. A contributing 
factor has been the higher inflation. Based on a simulation exercise, other things being equal, a 2 
percentage points increase in overall inflation would raise poverty headcount rate by 0.8 percentage point 
(measured at $1.90), pushing approximately 225,000 people back into poverty. 

 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Agriculture, despite being the mainstay of the rural economy, suffers low productivity in the crop sector  
 
3. Agriculture is the mainstay of the rural economy and a source of income for the majority of Nepali 
with 66 percent of the population engaged in agriculture (small farmers constitute 80 percent of the rural 
population), a 32 percent contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (Central Bureau of Statistics, 
FY16), and 50 percent contribution to exports earning.  
 

4. Despite this importance of the agricultural sector, the level of income from agriculture is low by the 
regional and international standards, particularly for the major cereal crops (lower than their potential yield 
by at least 50 percent).   Thus, agriculture in Nepal has not made substantial contribution to improving the 
living standards during the past decades.   
 
5. Nepal’s rural population comprises mainly smallholder farmers and about 80 percent of the rural 
population aged fifteen and above is engaged in agriculture.  The unavailability of sustainable livelihood 
opportunities in the rural areas has led to a large-scale exodus of the population to the cities and more 
recently to the Gulf region.  The absence of able-bodied farm labor, continuation of traditional irrigation 
practice, and limited exposure to modern agriculture practices, have led to reduced farm production.  
Existing farmers are generally unable to benefit from existing modern technologies and inputs. 
 
6. The pressing priority is thus to improve agricultural productivity and foster diversification towards 


high-value products to secure food security for a growing population and to improve rural incomes. 
 
Public investment in improving irrigation is becoming paramount for transforming the agriculture sector  
 
7. The frail mountain terrain limits the agricultural potential area to 2.641 million hectares (ha), of which 
1.77 million ha has irrigation potential.  Irrigation systems in Nepal fall under four distinct categories: (1) 
traditional farmer-managed irrigation systems (FMIS) developed and managed by the communities; (2) a 
range of small to large-scale surface systems developed with full or partial support from the government; (3) 
government-developed tube-well irrigation schemes; and (4) individually-owned and operated tube wells 
and pumps, mostly utilizing shallow aquifers, streams, ponds, and dug wells.  
 
8. At present, the total irrigated area stands at 1.39 million ha of which only 42% has year-round 
irrigation.  There is limited new land that can be brought under farming as most of the economically-suitable 
lands for agriculture have already been exploited, mainly because of the substantial increase in Nepal’s 
population in the past century, with the exception of some potential horizontal expansion in newly-irrigated 
lands of around 0.35 million ha through investing in inter-basin transfers (see government policy below). 
Thus the largest potential for increasing production is by providing better agricultural inputs and assuring 
irrigation to the already-existing cultivated land, namely, a “vertical expansion”.  Modern agricultural 
practices require crop diversification, high-yielding varieties, improved fertilization, and reliable year-round 
irrigation.    
 
9. Of the aforementioned improvements, improving irrigation is critical to agriculture both during the 
monsoon season to overcome the periods of dry spells as well as during the dry season when rainfall is 
negligible.  Agriculture is becoming even more vulnerable to water due to the erratic monsoon rain.  Even 
when recently precipitation during the monsoon has reached 90 to 110 percent of its long-term average 
after two years of low rainfall, farmers get unreliable rainfall with both droughts and intense rainfall/floods 
often occurring in same season.  Thus, transforming the agriculture sector requires upgrading the irrigation 
systems to regulate the irrigation supply.  Only by mobilizing public funding to invest in effective irrigation 
systems, farmers could then focus on the complementary inter-farm/farm-level investments such as 
improving agricultural techniques and inputs and cropping intensity, thus leading to transforming farming to 
more profitable levels. 
 
Government Irrigation Policy and Irrigation Development Program.   
 
10. The Government of Nepal (GoN) has thus recognized the lack of intensive cropping, inadequate 
supply and use of basic agricultural inputs such as fertilizer and improved seeds, and problems with 
deteriorated and inefficient irrigation systems.  
 
11. The Agriculture Perspective Plan (APP) assigns the first priority to accelerating agricultural growth 
through concentrated investment in irrigation. Also one of the key management goals of the APP is to 
expand farmer ownership and operation of irrigation schemes as irrigation is vital to the national 
agricultural production and economic transformation.   


Basic Tenets of Irrigation Policy 2013

 
12. The Department of Irrigation (DoI) is the lead agency in Nepal tasked with developing and improving 
irrigation infrastructure.  The primary effort of DoI has been to design and implement irrigation 
infrastructure to provide irrigation to potential new areas and also to intervene in existing schemes to 
improve their irrigation efficiency and sustainability. 
 
13. The GoN’s strategy for irrigation development and management is reflected in the Water Resources 
Strategy (2002), National Water Plan (2005), Irrigation Development Vision and Action Plan (2006), and 
recently, the Irrigation Policy (2013

1
, Figure below).   The main vision described in these documents is to 

integrate agriculture and irrigation development in order to realize the full benefits from investment in 
irrigation and provide sustainable services to the agriculture sector through well-operating irrigation 
facilities, based on local resources mobilization through a partnership of the users and the government. 
There is an emphasis on: (i) provision of year-round irrigation services to increase the productivity of 
irrigated agriculture and extending the cropping seasons; (ii) the need for a service-oriented management 
approach as a means for providing more reliable and flexible water services to farmers; and (iii) the 
progressive shifting of operation and maintenance (O&M) costs to water users to enhance efficiency, equity, 
and sustainability.   

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14. As GoN internalized the concept of year-round irrigation through its Nepal Water Resource Strategy 
(2002) and National Water Plan (2005), the DoI aimed to provide year-round irrigation to vast potential 
areas to boost crop production, leading to food self-sufficiency, employment generation and poverty 

                                            
1
 Entitled the “Irrigation Policy for 2070” in reference to the Bikram Sambat (BS 2070) which corresponds to 2013 AD. The policy was approved on July 13, 2013. 

 


reduction.  There are four themes under this DoI goal:  
a) Rehabilitation of existing FMISs;   

b) Design and construction of new irrigation schemes (including the ongoing MoRJKIP and its proposed 
phase 2);   

c) Improve the agency-managed large-scale irrigation projects and handover their management to 
beneficiary farmers (the so called, Irrigation Management Transfer (IMT)), either fully or below the main-
canal level; and  

d) Expand the irrigation area horizontally through investing in “inter-basin water transfers”. 

15. The Tables below reflect some of the DoI target indicators for the next five years, in incremental areas 
and crop yields.    

Table 1:  DOI target for the incremental irrigated area by 2022 
 

Activity Unit Status to date 
Target increment 

after 5 years  

Increment in irrigated area by surface irrigation  Ha 775,000 45,335 

Increment in irrigated area by groundwater Ha 409,013 206,470 

Increment in irrigated area by non-conventional  irrigation 
methods (e.g. solar pumping)  

Ha 5,865 21,100 

Rehabilitation of Farmer Managed Irrigation System (FMIS) Ha 202,299 71,500 

Required financial Resources (in Billion NRs.) 
  

147 

 
Table 2:  Examples for the DOI’s target increase in crop production  (ton/ha) 

 

Before Intervention After Intervention 

Irrigated area Hectare Production 
(ton/ha) 

Irrigated area Hectar
e 

Production (ton/ha) 

Rehabilitation 
of FMIS 

67,000 Paddy 2.2, Wheat 
1.7, Maize 1.76, 
Potato 7.8 

Rehabilitated 
area 

67,000  Paddy 3.6, Wheat 2.7, 
Maize 2.8, Potato 13.0 

IMT projects 102,590 Paddy 2.9, Wheat 
2, Maize 2.1, 
Potato 10 

Management 
Transferred to 
WUAs 

102,59
0  

Paddy 4.7, Wheat 3, 
Maize 4.2, Potato 18.1 

Yields as reported by the Bank-supported Irrigation and Water Resources Management Project (IWRMP, 
August 2016), which supports activities under both the FMIS and IMT categories.   

 
New irrigation schemes   
 
16. The DoI is entrusted with the planning, design and implementation of medium to large-size irrigation 
projects mostly in the hills and Terai region. The Rani-Jamara-Kulariaya Irrigation Project (IP), Mahakali III, 
Babai IP, Sikta IP, Bagmati IP are examples of such large-size undertakings.  The development/modernization 


of medium to small schemes (below 300 ha in hills and below 2,000 ha in Terai) are implemented by the 
Medium Irrigation Project (MIP) and the Non-Conventional Irrigation Technology Project (NITP).  At present, 
the MIP has about 250 new irrigation projects in the pipeline with a combined cultivable command area 
(CCA) of approximately 37,000 ha and the NITP has in the pipeline about 732 small new projects especially 
in the hills/mountains with combined CCA of about 8,450 ha.  The DoI intends to continue the development 
of feasible new irrigation schemes in the future.  In addition, the DoI has started the use of solar energy to 
pump blue water to adjoining river terraces for irrigation.  This activity has already been initiated along the 
Bheri corridor and is under consideration for the Babai river, and the DoI intends to expand its use to all 
feasible areas.    
 
17. The Rani Jamara Kularia scheme (the ongoing Bank-financed Phase 1 and the proposed Phase 2) is 
amongst the largest schemes in the entire country under the category of new schemes, and it benefits one 
of the poorest areas in the Tarai in south west of the Karnali river basin.    

 
Farmer Organizations and Participatory Irrigation Management (or “Joint Participatory Management”, JPM) 
18. Nepal has a long tradition of farmer-managed irrigation systems (FMISs) in the hills, mountains, and 
the Terai.  The FMISs cover about 70 percent of the 1.2 million ha of land with some form of irrigation 
infrastructure in the country. The hill FMISs are generally small in size compared to the FMISs in the medium 
to large irrigation systems in the Terai.  A strong sense of ownership and hierarchical management system 
exists in the FMISs.  They often exist in some form of Water Users Associations/Groups (WUA/WUG), tasked 
with operation and maintenance (O&M) of the schemes, most of which is done through labor contribution.    
 
19. However, improving irrigation services in the existing FMIS schemes requires a combination of 
“hardware” and “software” solutions.  The former involves rehabilitating and modernizing existing irrigation 
and drainage infrastructure to improve reliability of supply and expand the system of secondary and tertiary 
canals.   The latter requires the development of more efficient mechanisms for managing the irrigation 
systems down to the field level, through a clear delineation of responsibilities between the government and 
the WUAs in charge of delivering irrigation services to farmers.  There is also a need to pool funding through 
government and users contributions for O&M and asset replacement over time. 

 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

20. The proposed project is consistent with the Nepal Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY 2014–18 to 
support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in Nepal. The proposed project is aligned with the Pilar 2 of CPS 
– Increasing Inclusive Growth and Opportunities for Shared Prosperity. The proposed project aims to improve 
agriculture and water productivities through modernizing or rehabilitating the lower-order irrigation 
infrastructure, strengthening WUA, and implementing a comprehensive agricultural improvement program (CPS 
Outcome 2.1).  
 
21.  In line with the CPF, the Bank has been engaged in the irrigation and WRM sector through two lending 
projects, namely: (1) Irrigation and WRM Project, which is a collaboration of the Agriculture and Water Global 
Practices (IWRMP, IDA US$114m, closing in June 2018, targets 26,808 hectares); and (2) Modernization of Rani-



Jamara-Kulariya Irrigation Scheme-Phase 1 (MoRJKIP, IDA US$40m, due to close in September 2017, targets 
14,300 hectares).    The Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the CPS, conducted in October 2016, has 
indicated that by FY2018 the IWRMP and MoRJKP would increase the area under improved irrigation services by 
a total of 50,000 hectares, and would improve the end-users satisfaction with the performance of the WUAs 
from around 5% to 40%. 
 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
22.  The project development objectives are to improve the irrigation service and to strengthen farmer organizations 
in the irrigated areas of the Rani Jamara Kulariya Irrigation Scheme. 
 

Key Results (From PCN) 

 
PDO indicators:  

 
1. Area provided with new/improved irrigation or drainage services (a Corporate Result Indicator): in hectares. 

2. Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (a Corporate Result Indicator): in number, with the 
number of females as a supplemental indicator.   

 
D. Concept Description 

 

23.    The proposed operation will focus on modernization of the lower-order irrigation system (sub-branches, 
tertiary canals and water courses) so that irrigation water can reach farmer fields with the optimal flows, 
continuation of the WUA/WUG support program, implementation of a comprehensive agricultural improvement 
program, and support to the river-basin planning process. 
 
24.    The proposed operation is a second phase of the ongoing IDA-supported MoRJKIP.  The ongoing project 
focuses on modernization of the higher-order irrigation infrastructure (intakes, feeder and branch canals, 
including related flood protection), enhancing the capacity of WUAs to operate and maintain the improved/new 
irrigation infrastructure, and preparation and initiation of an agricultural development program.  The MoRJKIP is 
on track toward meeting the PDO.    
 
24.       The proposed phase 2 is very essential in complementing the ongoing phase 1, because of two inter-
related necessities:  
 
1. First, below the main/conveyance system introduced by phase 1, without phase 2 the irrigation distribution 

and application efficiencies would continue to be low compared to the global/regional norms.  Farmers apply 
as much as 2-3 litre/second/ha (the irrigation “hydro-module”) compared to an optimal level of around 1 
litre/second/hectare.  The lack of bulk inter-seasonal water storage needs to be compensated by completing 
the modernization of the system down to the farm level, in order to optimize canal storage and irrigation 
scheduling, thus optimize the root-zone moisture across the crop-growth stages. 

2. Second, the WUAs function is not supposed to stop at the main-system level.  There is a need to utilize the 

immense potential for JPM in the Rani-Jamara-Kulariya community, building on the creation and 
empowerment of WUAs attained under the phase 1, so that the WUAs can also have a major role in the 
O&M of the irrigation subsystem down to the farm level.   
  

20. The envisaged project components are as follows:    
 
Component 1, Scheme Modernization (US$58 million, mainly civil works): will support the construction and 
modernization of the lower-order irrigation infrastructure, including the sub-branch canals, tertiary canals, and 
water courses. The activities will include design and execution of irrigation and drainage subsystems below the 
Branch Canals and down to the Field Outlet levels, including not only the irrigation subsystems but also related 
river-training and flood-protection works, collector and tertiary drains, and control structures. 
 

Component 2, Agricultural Production Support and Strengthening Water Users Associations/Groups 
(WUAs/WUGs) (US$6 million): will support: (i) strengthening WUAs/WUGs to assume responsibility for 
management, operation, and maintenance of the modernized system; and (ii) carrying out a series of 
agriculture-based activities in the project area to internalize the gains made in phase 1 and to increase and 
sustain agricultural production through the promotion of water-smart improved farming practices, crop 
diversification, post-harvest support, farmer training through demonstrations and farmer field schools, and 
other adaptive processes. Thus the second phase will adopt value-chain-based approach to support 
agricultural activities.   
 
Component 3, Project Management (US$1 million, including goods, technical assistance and capacity 
building): will support activities to ensure effective project management, including fiduciary and safeguards 
management and monitoring and evaluation. 

 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 

A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 
Located in the Kailali District of the Far Western Development Region, the proposed project will cover eight Village Deve 

lopment Committees (VDC) and Tikapur Municipality. Tikapur Municipality is the main market center in the project area. 
The existing Rani Jamara and Kulariya Irrigation scheme consists of three independent traditional irrigation systems 
constructed, operated and managed by the indigenous Tharu community.  The ethnic composition of the project area 
includes Tharus as the dominant group (48 percent) followed by Chhetri (17 percent), Dalit (15 percent), Brahmin (10 
percent) and others (7 percent).  There are three water users associations and one central committee (federation) that 
has representations of the three WUAs. 
The proposed project is in the Terai (plain) area of Nepal. There are community and state forests in and around the 

project area. Nearest protected area is the Bardiya National Park, which is located across the source river Karnali, in the 
east of the project area. The target area is the 14,300 ha of the Rani, Jamara and Kulariya command area.  Under the 
ongoing phase 1 which focused on the river/ main system level, the Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) has been triggered 
because the Karnali River has protected and endangered aquatic species, including the Gangetic Dolphin, Marsh Mugger, 
and Gharial Crocodile.    Also, the Karnali River corridor (forests) is a wildlife movement route for especially elephant, 
tiger, and rhino.  As some of the phase 1 works have been aligned along the fringes of forest areas, the OP/BP 4.36 on 
Forests was triggered and issues were addressed as part of the Environmental Management Plan.  An Environmental 
Assessment (EA) of the Phase 2 will be commissioned to identify, assess and recommend measures for avoidance, 
minimization, and mitigation of potential adverse environmental impacts as well as to enhance positive impacts related to 
component 1 and component 2 of the project.   
 
The scheme abstracts water from the Karnali River, a major left-bank tributary of the Ganges River. The Karnali River has 

its source in China and flows through Western Nepal into India (where it is called Ghaghara River before it joins the 
Ganges). The Karnali River is thus an international waterway for purposes of OP 7.50.  Due to uncontrolled diversion of 
the Karnali River water into the main canals there is typically excessive water entry, while there is no control of the water. 
The scheme in its current state has very low water use efficiency and large water losses through seepage and water 
logging.  The proposed phase 2 will complement phase 1 in helping to reduce water abstraction from the Karnali River, by 
over 40 percent of the current water abstraction.  There upon, an exception to the notification requirement under OP 
7.50 has been received from South Asia‟ s Regional Vice President on February 24, 2011. A Strategic Environmental and 
Social Assessment (SESA) of the proposed River Basin Management Plan (RBM) will be carried out during implementation. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The DoI is currently implementing MoRJKIP - Phase 1.  During the preparation of the ongoing MoRJKIP – phase 1, Social 

Assessment (SA) and Environmental Assessment (EA) were carried out, based on which DoI prepared Social Impact 
Management Framework (SIMF) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to manage social and environmental 
safeguard issues.  The SIMF prepared under Phase 1 includes a policy framework for land acquisition and resettlement, 
along with Vulnerable Community Development Framework, Gender and Social Inclusion Framework to ensure that the 
benefits from the project reaches the indigenous people, vulnerable people, women and other disadvantaged groups.  A 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the feeder canal was prepared and implemented.  Under Phase 1, private land was 
not affected but a few private structures were affected.  An Indigenous and Vulnerable Community Development Plan 
(IVCDP) was also prepared.  To manage social and environmental safeguard activities, a Senior Sociologist and 
Environmental Specialist have been appointed under Phase 1, yet he started work in a late stage of the project.  The DoI 
have acquired familiarity and experience with Bank’s social and environmental safeguard requirements through the 
ongoing MoRJKIP- Phase 1.  The recent safeguard rating under Phase 1 is moderately satisfactory. Besides the safeguard 

specialist recruited under the project, a Local Environmental Monitoring Committee (LEMC) was formed. LEMC 



consisted of representatives from environmental stakeholders in the area such as Bardia National Park, community forest 
users group, district forest and NGO, played positive roles in monitoring and providing advices / guidance with regard to 

environmental management. However, late recruitment of environmental specialists and turnover of the specialist was 
one of the weak points. The absence of specialist service/ support during initial stage and later as well has affected the 
timely support, monitoring, reporting, and implementing the mitigation activities as well as timely coordination with local 

stakeholders, and regularity of the LEMC meetings and awareness activities.   
 
The proposed project, Phase 2, will build on these existing frameworks and their implementation experience to comply 

with the safeguard policies.  The command area is defined, main canal and branch canal have been modernized in the 
Phase I.  An EA will be conducted for the new proposed system and EMP will be drafted accordingly to address 
environmental issues. The proposed project will intervene in the sub-system and inter-farm areas which are closer to 
privately-owned assets and livelihood. However, technical design of the project is yet to be performed, thus the specific 
nature and scale of the social impacts would be known later amid the pre-appraisal stage. Hence, social management 
framework is proposed. Gaps identified and lessons learnt during the implementation of RJKIP Phase I will be considered 
while revising the existing Social Management Framework.  
 
  
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Drona Raj Ghimire, Jun Zeng, Rekha Shreesh 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Same as phase 1. As the project scope under 
Component 1 and Component 2 includes physical 
construction activities, and agricultural production 
support, potential adverse impacts on the natural 
environment and human health and safety are likely. 
Command area is defined and main and branch canals 
are existing (modernized in Phase I).  Hence, EA and 
EMP will be prepared for the modernization and 
agricultural production activities. EA and EMP, inter 
alia, will cover issues related to labour and labour 
camps, and EHS issues (following World Bank Groups’ 
EHS Guidelines).   

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Was triggered in phase 1 due to working on the main 
system. Karnali and Mohana Rivers are known to have 
important aquatic species (Gangetic Dolphin, Marsh 
Mugger, and Gharial crocodile). Occasional movement 
of wildlife has been reported in the adjoining forests. 
During project preparation, impacts on natural habitat 
and biodiversity will be assessed and appropriate 


mitigations as part of EA and EMP, (or if necessary, 
Stand-alone Biodiversity Management Plan) will be 
prepared.  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Was triggered in phase 1 due to working on the main 
system. There are community forests adjoining the 
project command area. Some sections of the main/ 
feeder canal constructed in the Phase I was located in 
the community forests.  In the Phase II, sub-branch 
canals, tertiary canals, inter-farm water courses are 
the main construction works.  These structure are 
away from the forest areas.  Hence, there is less 
chance of adverse impacts on forest. However, during 
preparation of the project, each activity will be 
reviewed to see if the project has potential to cause 
loss or degradation (the health and quality) of forest. 
EA will assess potential impacts and propose 
mitigations, if necessary. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

 
Emphasis of Phase II, under Component 2, is to 

increase and sustain agricultural production by 
carrying out a series of agriculture-based 
activities, adopting value-chain-based approach. 
This may lead to introduction of pesticides or 
increased use of pesticides. During project 
preparation, this will be reviewed thoroughly and 
the EA / EMP will have measures, such as 
Integrated Pest Management, to mitigate adverse 
impacts (or if necessary, separate Pest 
Management Plan will be prepared).    

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 
This was not triggered in the Phase 1.  The ESIA will 
confirm if the project will affect PCR. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The RJKIP project will be implemented in an area with 
Indigenous ethnic minorities. Tharus, indigenous to 
the area, are in a majority (48 percent) followed by 
other indigenous groups from the hill. The project 
areas are also comprised of other vulnerable groups 
such as Dalits, women-headed households.   
SIMF will comprise a Vulnerable Community 
Development Framework (VCDF) and Gender and 
Social Inclusion Framework to guide planning 
approaches on indigenous peoples (and vulnerable 
groups) and interventions under the project. SA and 
VCDP will be prepared for project locations known by 
appraisal while VCDF will be the guiding document for 
the remaining works.  


Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Major issues of land acquisition are unlikely.  However, 
the upgrading works may require small plots of land 
and have impacts on structures requiring relocation.  
Policy framework for land acquisition and 
resettlement will be included as a part of SIMF will 
provide a legal framework on involuntary 
resettlement. If project locations are known by 
appraisal, SA and RAP will be prepared. In other 
remaining works, where project location is not fixed, 
policy framework will be the guiding document in 
preparation of RAP. RAP will include among others 
entitlement matrix, communication strategy and GRM. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
Same as phase 1. Project does not include 
construction of dam, neither depends on existing dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

Was triggered with phase 1 as it focused on works on 
the river and main system.  In phase 2, works on the 
sub-system and inter-farm level are not expected to 
cause any appreciable transboundary water impact.  
The system modernization is expected to reduce water 
abstraction (the hydro-module is currently as high as 3 
liter/sec/hectare) thus will not impact the water 
flowing downstream.  Through a similar rationale 
under phase 1 an exception to the notification 
requirement under OP 7.50 was received from South 
Asia‟ s Regional Vice President on February 24, 2011.  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No There is no disputed area.  

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Sep 11, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
September 2017 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany 

Sr Water Resources Spec. 
 

 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Nepal 

 

 

 
 

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Project for Source Sustainability and climate Resilient Rain-fed Agriculture in Himachal Pradesh 
(P165129) 

 
 

  
Jun 04, 2019 Page 1 of 16  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 07-Jun-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC23122 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P165129  Integrated Project for 
Source Sustainability 
and climate Resilient 
Rain-fed Agriculture in 
Himachal Pradesh 
(P165129) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Nov 25, 2019 Feb 27, 2020 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of Economic 
Affairs 

Department of Forest, 
Government of Himachal 
Pradesh 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To increase the sustainable use of water resources in Himachal Pradesh by improving upstream watershed 
management and increasing agricultural water productivity in selected Gram Panchayats 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 80.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 80.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 20.00 



          Borrower/Recipient 20.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
Not applicable. 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. India’s growth remains robust but has moderated from prior high levels in the past fiscal year (FY18/19).  After 
growing at 7.2 percent in FY17/18, economic growth slowed to 6.8 percent in FY 18/19, with quarterly growth falling to 
5.8 percent (y-o-y) in Q4. Growth remains broad-based, but the impact of accelerating industrial growth was 
counterbalanced by decelerations in services and agriculture growth, on the production side. On the demand side, 
consumption has been bolstered by public spending, but investment growth has decelerated.  In FY18/19, the current 
account deficit is estimated to have reached 2.6 percent of GDP but a strong rebound in foreign investment over the 
second half of the year allowed foreign reserves to remain at a comfortable level of US$411.9 billion, as of end-March 
2019 (equivalent to about 9.7 months of imports). Going forward, output growth is projected to recover and stabilize at 
around 7.5 percent, thanks primarily to resilient private consumption, but also to a rise in exports of goods and services 
and a gradual recovery in investment. The current account deficit is projected to narrow to 1.9 percent of GDP in 
FY19/20 but external headwinds—in the form of re-escalating trade tensions and elevated oil prices – could put pressure 
on the balance of payments. 
 
2. Since the 2000s, India has made remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty. Between FY2011/12 and 
2015, poverty declined from 21.6 to an estimated 13.4 percent at the international poverty line (2011 PPP US$ 1.90 per 
person per day), continuing the earlier trend of robust reduction in poverty. Aided by robust economic growth, more 
than 90 million people escaped extreme poverty and improved their living standards during this period. Despite this 
success, poverty remains widespread in India. In 2015, with the latest estimates, 176 million Indians were living in 
extreme poverty while 659 million, or half the population, were below the higher poverty line commonly used for lower 
middle-income countries (2011 PPP US$ 3.20 per person per day). Recent trends in the construction sector and rural 
wages, a major source of employment for the poorer households, suggest that the pace of poverty eradication may have 
moderated. 
 
3. India is the world’s third largest emitter of greenhouse gasses (GHGs) and is highly vulnerable to climate 
change. It has ratified the Paris Agreement (COP21) and is committed to “enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening 
resilience, and reducing vulnerability to climate change”. India’s federal intended national determined contributions 

(INDC) commits to reduce the energy intensity of GDP from one-third and to increase the share of renewable energy 
(including from hydro generation). It also commits India to expand its existing carbon sink by 2.5 – 3.0 billion mt of 
carbon dioxide. Large areas of India are likely to be under water stress: 54 percent of the country’s area is subject to 
high or extremely high water stress, and almost 600 million face disruptions from surface water supply disruptions. 
Punjab and Haryana – major rice and wheat producing states – are particularly affected. More than half of the country’s 
groundwater wells are dropping, 16 percent by more than one meter per year.1 With shared water resources and given 
the region’s complex history, the region could see escalating tensions over water use in the future. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
4. Himachal Pradesh (HP) is a Special Category state in the Himalayan mountains. Special Category status is 
afforded due to inter alia: (i) mountainous terrain; (ii) low population density (123 per km2); (iii) significant population of 
scheduled tribes; (iv) HP’s strategic location bordering neighboring countries; (v) it’s ‘backward’ status in terms of 
economic development and infrastructure; and (v) non-viable nature of the state’s financial situation (the fiscal deficit for 
FY2019/20 is projected to be 4.4 percent of the state’s GDP). With an altitude ranging from 350 meters above mean sea 
level [msl] to 6,975 msl, much of the state’s area is sloping, with inclines of between 0.5 – 70 percent. Land with a slope 
of up to 40 percent is already typically under agricultural production; in some areas farming is practiced on even steeper 
gradients of 60 – 70 percent. Of a total of 3,243 Gram Panchayats (GPs) in HP, 551 (or 17 percent) have been declared 
‘backward’ status and therefore subject to special programs from the Government. Scheduled tribes are scattered 
throughout the state with concentrations in Kinnaur and Lahaul and Spiti, and parts of Chamba amounting to 6 percent of 
the total population of which 32 percent are located in Scheduled Areas of the State; there is also a considerable scheduled 
caste population of 25 percent. Himachal Pradesh is among India’s leading States on gender equality and social 
development. It has the highest female labor force participation rate in the country2, even though it has declined since 
2005. Much of the state’s female workforce participation is driven by women’s self-employment in agriculture, still the 
mainstay of the state’s largely rural economy. Women’s higher participation in agriculture, horticulture, and livestock 
sectors is socially and culturally embedded in the state, largely due to traditional out-migration of men for jobs that leaves 
the women behind to provide labor and supervisory inputs to pre-harvest and post-harvest activities. However, their 
access to ag-tech & climate resilient technologies, markets and finance, as well as to skills and entrepreneurship 
opportunities remains limited. Non-farm jobs for rural women remain limited. New opportunities in agribusiness are 
important to reverse the decline in women’s participation in agriculture.  
 
5. HP has a particular role to play in contributing to India’s INDC commitments. Its topography and available water 
resources are well suited to hydro generation with an installed capacity of 3,421 MW controlled jointly by the GoHP (8 
percent) and GoI (92 percent), against an estimated potential of over 27,000 MW. Only 14 percent of India’s total 
generation is from hydro, of which 8 percent is from HP.3 Meeting the INDC commitments on reducing the carbon intensity 
of India’s energy generation will depend on further exploitation of hydro in states like HP.  Improved watershed and 
catchment area management upstream of hydro reservoirs can reduce operational costs from siltation and water turbidity  
. Similarly, HP enjoys around 1.126 million ha of forest cover, representing 25 percent of the land area in the state and 1.5 
percent of India’s total forest cover of 70.827 million ha.4 Although currently a small share of the overall area, HP has 
substantial potential to further expand forest cover (including through increased density) and therefore will play a major 
role in contributing to the national commitments on carbon sequestration.  

         

 
6. The Government of Himachal Pradesh (GoHP) is already well experienced in management of its natural 
resources as a driver for development but recognizes the need to increase the quality and sustainable use of these 
resources. Over two-thirds of the total land area in the state is formally categorized as forest land, of which, 46 percent 
supports coniferous and broadleaved forests while the remaining 54 percent includes high altitude areas above the tree 
line, snow peaks, alpine pastures, and river beds. The state has zoned 23 percent of the legally classified forest area as 
protected areas (5 national parks, 26 wildlife sanctuaries and 3 conservation reserves) and HPFD manages these to protect 
biodiversity and promote ecotourism. These forests provide catchment areas for 5 major river basins. Despite 
considerable investments to date in catchment treatment and afforestation, forest quality (measured as canopy density) 
remains poor in HP. The gross area of forests is increasing due to better law enforcement, afforestation to offset forests 
cleared for development, and the partial lifting of the felling ban in 2018, which allowed for selective felling of older trees 
and subsequent regeneration. However, the quality of forests has not improved over the past six decades due to several 
factors, including poor afforestation techniques, lack of maintenance, incorrect site/plant selection, and uncontrolled 
grazing and fires.  The state has enjoyed significant success in agricultural development in particular fruit production and 
as a major source of off-season vegetables exported to other parts of India. Fruit production exceeds 600,000mt of which 
three-quarters is apples) while over 1.8 million mt of vegetables are produced annually. However, the majority of 
agricultural land (85 percent) remains under rain-fed agriculture and the land under irrigation reports a low intensity of 
137 percent (i.e. only one-third is used for more than one crops a year). Given changing weather patterns already observed 
(annual and monsoon rains declining by 2.26mm and 2.85mm per year respectively; mean annual temperature increasing 
on 0.02 degrees Celsius per year) progress could be easily reversed unless the state invests in adaptation strategies to 
increase resilience. 

 
7. Natural resource management (NRM) therefore remains pivotal to the state’s long-term economic and social 
development, especially in the context of climate change. A profile of climate smart agriculture (CSA) in the state, 
commissioned as part of project preparatory tasks highlighted critical aspects of both the mitigation and adaptation 
agenda in the state: 

 

• Mitigation: Agriculture is a minor source of the state’s GHG emissions, constituting only 1.8 percent (164,000mt 
of CO2 equivalent) of the total. Of these, 90 percent are attributable to rice cultivation over 43,450 ha of area; 
crop residue burning adds a further 8 percent and enteric fermentation contributes less than 2 percent. 
 

• Adaptation: There are many examples of CSA technologies already being deployed in cereals, horticulture, 
vegetable and livestock sectors. However, observed adoption rates are typically less than 30 percent, meaning 
there is considerable scope for scaling these up throughout the state. Adoption rates in the horticulture and 
higher-value vegetable sectors are typically higher. This is because the financial incentives are stronger but also 
because the farmer endowments that drive past diversification out of cereals are the same as those that make 
adoption easier. CSA technologies are not scale neutral, they are risky, and there are significant up-front 
investment costs. Integrating CSA technologies more thoroughly into the existing Krishi Vigyan Kendra (KVK; i.e. 
research and extension) system is essential.  
 

simultaneously both the direct cause and the victims of degradation. Supporting GPs to lead community-based 
development has and will continue to be a key tenet of the GoHP’s approach moving forward. 
 
9. GoHP has a clear and relevant vision for its NRM sector. First, it seeks to continue its impressive trajectory of 
rural transformation by raising agricultural productivity, strengthening market linkages and diversifying production 
patterns to increase agricultural value addition, while maintaining biodiversity and ensuring sustainable land and water 
use. Second, GoHP recognizes its role as custodian of a unique landscape with a special set of critical natural resource 
endowments that provide critical environmental services not only for its own population but for other states and indeed 
globally. Therefore, it recognizes the importance of reconciling the imperative of delivering results in terms of continued 
development for its population without undermining its natural resource base.  
 
10. The project addresses several elements of outstanding agendas in the realm of NRM, forestry and agriculture. 
A review of ex poste assessments (implementation completion reports and project or thematic evaluations) reports a 
positive track record of past interventions that have delivered on their project objectives, although considerable effort is 
required to achieve the necessary outcomes. This is in part a question of scale – past interventions have been necessarily 
focused – whereas in other aspects additional transformation and innovation is required. Notable innovations include the 
greater role of GPs in taking responsibility for, and managing investments in, sustainable landscape management and the 
development of CSA practices and their integration into existing farmer extension systems. Other innovations include the 
successful application for climate change financing and achievements in diversification into higher value market-oriented 
fruit and vegetable production, leveraging HP’s position as a major off-season producer serving distant Indian markets. 
The major challenges moving forward are to further scale-up these successes by utilizing Bank support to address specific 
institutional and technical constraints for doing so – i.e. not just the financing of scale-up which can in principle be deferred 
to GoHP’s own resources. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Project for Source Sustainability and climate Resilient Rain-fed Agriculture in Himachal Pradesh 
(P165129) 

 
 

Relationship to CPF 

 
11. The World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) juxtaposed: (i) India’s development priorities as 
outlined in its FY2017-19 action agenda as well as national missions and programs; (ii) the assessment of India’s challenges 
in sustaining progress towards the twin goals as set out in the Bank’s Strategic Country Diagnostic (SCD); (iii) the WBG’s 
comparative advantage in the country; and (iv) lessons derived from decades of WBG engagement in India. The CPF 
identified three substantive areas: (i) promoting resource efficient growth; (ii) enhancing competitiveness and enabling 
job creation, and (iii) investing in human capital. In addition to these focus areas, the CPF also set out four operating 
modalities. These are: (i) leveraging the private sector; (ii) strengthening public sector institutions; (iii) engaging a Federal 
India; and (iv) promoting a “Lighthouse India” that connects practical know-how for the benefit of India and the wider 
world. 

 
12. The project is consistent with the CPF by delivering outcomes for resource efficient growth in targeted GPs in HP 
and in enhancing competitiveness of farmers and related agribusinesses in selected value chains. It also seeks to 
strengthen public sector institutions while leveraging the private sector and will contribute significantly to Lighthouse 
India by demonstrating approaches in challenging agro-ecological conditions of wider interest across the Himalayan range. 

 


     

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
13. To increase the sustainable use of water resources in Himachal Pradesh by improving upstream watershed 
management and increasing agricultural water productivity in selected Gram Panchayats 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
14. Proposed PDO-level indicators are as follows: 

• Increased sustainability of perennial water sources in targeted watersheds 

• Selected upland areas managed in accordance with site-specific management plans 

• Increased agricultural water productivity among participating farmers 

• A more institutionally integrated approach to multi-sectoral watershed-level decision making 

• Increased adoption of climate-smart technologies among participating farmers 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
15. The overarching problem statement the project seeks to address is that HP is facing increased demand for, and 
reduced supply of, water resources and therefore needs to manage these better if it is to maintain its economic growth 
without jeopardizing continued downstream supply to the grain basket of Punjab.  HP’s population increased 13 percent 
over the decade 2001 – 2011 with an ever-greater share now residing in urban areas. Niti Aayog reports5 that half of all 
springs are now dry or seasonal. Addressing this challenge requires progress under three pillars: 

 

• Sustainable land and water resource management; 
 

• Improved agricultural productivity and value addition; and 
 

• Institutional capacity of GoHP to sustainably manage watersheds and resource use trade-offs and to effectively 
deliver environmental services. 

 
16. Each element contributes to the overall theory of change that underpins the proposed project design, as follows 
and summarized in the Figure below: 

 

• Land and water management: Current land use practices in upstream watersheds is resulting in excessive soil 
erosion and degradation, rain-water run-off and depleted rates of recharge of critical aquifers. Soil run-off results 
in reduced natural soil fertility (with a resulting loss on productivity or additional costs for replacement of 
inorganic fertilizers) and reservoir and intake sedimentation with the consequent loss of hydro generation 
capacity and damage to turbines, and/ or reduced availability of stored water for drinking or irrigation. This is 
compounded by retreating glacial sources and changes in rainfall patterns linked with climate change. 
 

• Existing agricultural productivity remains low – both in terms of physical yields (mt/ha) and value (Rs/ha). The 
use of irrigation is extremely limited across the state, with surface irrigation predominating and more limited use 
of the drop or sprinkler systems required for higher value crops, which can lead to substantial increases in water 

                                            
5 Niti Aayog (2018) Report of Working Group 1: Inventory and Revival of Springs in the Himalayas for Water Security  



productivity. The absence of irrigation remains a binding constraint on farmers’ ability to increase incomes (and 
therefore undermines the policy objective of doubling farmer incomes) and renders them vulnerable to climatic 
shocks; a situation that is becoming increasingly precarious with climate change. 
 

• The GoHP lacks robust institutional mechanisms for making trade-offs and investments to ensure sustainability 
of environmental services into the future. It cannot properly evaluate relative values of competing uses for the 
states’ natural resources, especially in terms of the states’ overall management of environmental services. There 
is an absence of underlying analytical foundation for such trade-offs to be evaluated, and no formal structures to 
facilitate integrated decision-making. Moreover, fragmentation amongst ministries and agencies means that any 
investments in upstream watersheds are typically insufficient and/ or inconsistent and therefore not adequate or 
efficiently delivered. 

 
Figure 2: Summary of the Theory of Change 
 

 
 
17. The project will deploy institutional and technical solutions to address these challenges. These are explained in 
more detail below with each proposed project component corresponding to the constraints thereby completing the 
project’s theory of change. 
 
Component 1: Sustainable Land and Water Resource Management 

 
18. This component promotes participatory and sustainable land and water management through financing the 
planning and implementation of investments in selected catchments based on the Sutlej Basin Comprehensive CAT 
(CCAT) plan, and micro-catchment plans in other river basins. For each of these, range-level site-specific management 
plans (SSMP) will be prepared to specify detailed activities by location. The main implementers and beneficiaries will be 



HP Forest Department (HPFD) staff and relevant community organizations, particularly Joint Forest Management 
Committees (JFMCs). The component will include a combination of TA, investments, and partnerships with other agencies 
and will lead to improved forest cover (and hence carbon capture), increased water and sediment regulation, reduced 
erosion, and improved community participation in and benefits from forest management.  

 
Subcomponent 1A: Improved planning for participatory and sustainable land and water management 
 
19. Subcomponent 1A will strengthen landscape planning. Specifically, it will: (a) review progress and revise the 
existing Sutlej Basin CCAT plan; (b) prepare micro-catchment plans in other project river basins; (c) support additional 
diagnostic studies, designs, and assessments; and (d) develop SSMPs through a participatory process led jointly by the 
HPDD and JFMCs. The CCAT plan review will identify the most cost-effective interventions implemented to date and 
propose revisions to plan investments and locations based on new hydrological and sediment load modeling. The CCAT 
plan review will include the design and implementation of a comprehensive M&E system for CCAT plan investments 
initially across the Sutlej Basin and later replicated in other project catchment areas and will include measurement of 
water flows and sediment loads to refine the hydrological models and ensure that investments maximize silt retention 
and surface water absorption. 

 
Subcomponent 1B: Implementation of participatory and sustainable land and water management investments 
 
20. This subcomponent will finance the implementation of activities identified in the SSMPs will contribute to 
improved forest cover and quality (including carbon emission reductions and sequestration), as well as improved water 
and sediment regulation. Activities supported by this subcomponent include, but are not limited to, the following areas: 

 

• Soil and water conservation measures. Vegetative measures, such as af/re-forestation, grass seeding, grass turfs, 
brushwood, live hedges, and spurs, as well as mechanical measures, such as check dams, drop structures, crate 
wire spur structures, bunds and water harvesting, and drainage line treatments, like gully plugging.  
 

• Development of high-quality seed stands. Establishment of a geo-referenced seed production system; 
construction of a centralized seed center to process, treat, store, and test seed; and construction of a climate-
controlled seed bank.  
 

• Nursery development. Provision of machinery and equipment to produce the additional seedlings. 
 

• Forest management. Planting and management of trees in open and medium density forests and slopes vulnerable 
to soil erosion and protection of plantations 
 

• Pasture management. Introduction of rotational grazing, delineation of forest areas for the supply of fodder, and 
the introduction of voluntary systems to prevent livestock from grazing in young forest. 
 

• Forest fire prevention and suppression. Organization of community fire protection groups; provision of locally-
appropriate firefighting equipment to the HPFD offices and participating communities; and training of 
communities on controlled burning, and the collection and use of pine needles. 

 
 
 


     

Component 2: Improved Agricultural Productivity and Value Addition 
 
21. This component would support interventions in downstream areas where the primary (existing or potential) 
water use is for irrigation in agriculture. It would seek to augment the use of irrigation as a principle strategy for shifting 
from low-value cereal production to higher-value fruit and vegetable production but would do so with a focus on 
increasing water productivity so as to maximize the financial returns to water use. Key interventions include infrastructure 
to increase high-productivity water utilization (drip and sprinkler irrigation plus the necessary primary and secondary 
distribution systems) 
 
Subcomponent 2A: Increasing value addition through improving water productivity  
 
22. Subcomponent 2A will support investments in the provision of water by investing in primary and secondary 
distribution infrastructure and matching grants for the purchase of on-farm equipment for drip and sprinkler (i.e. high-
tech) irrigation technology. It will support decentralized water infrastructure development under the Pradhan Mantri 
Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) based on robust micro-watershed plans across clusters of GPs in locations. By focusing on 
water productivity rather than water availability it will only invest in increasing water utilization in GPs where: (i) upstream 
investments in source sustainability are being implemented under Component 1; and (ii) where productivity of subsequent 
use will be maximized thereby ensuring ‘more crop for the (incremental) drop’. 
 
Subcomponent 2B: Adoption of Climate Smart Technologies and Diversification into High-Value Crops 
 
23. This component supports the adoption of climate smart agriculture (CSA) practices for existing cropping 
patterns in beneficiary GPs and also facilitates farmers to diversify into high-value crops, either in conjunction with 
high-tech irrigation equipment. The project will leverage HP’s agricultural research and extension system and existing 
Government-backed interventions to expand the adoption of contemporary CSA practices among participating farmers. 
CSA practices will apply to both existing cropping patterns and to new higher-value crops. Where the evidence of what 
constitutes CSA practices in these new crops is limited, the project will collaborate with the research institutions to 
strengthen the evidence base. This component will leverage and support the Government’s own KVK farmer extension 
system and their Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY; now known as the Remunerative Approach for Agriculture and Allied 
Sector Rejuvenation). By focusing on the market, and in conjunction with Subcomponent 2C, the approach adopted here 
will take a value chain perspective with competitiveness at the fore.  
 
24. This sub-component will also support greater use of Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs) as part of the 
diversification agenda, and as a mechanism for incentivizing community participation in sustainable land and water 
management. This will create alternative livelihood opportunities, by removing barriers to investment in NTFP value 
chains, and increase local incomes from sustainable production and increased value addition. This sub-component targets 
NTFP collectors, often women, and producers interested in cultivation of NTFPs (medicinal, aromatic plants) and other 
high-value commodities identified for value chain development. Alignment with the relevant line departments (e.g., 
agriculture, horticulture, and animal husbandry) will be ensured. In addition to improving local livelihoods, the proposed 
activities will reduce pressure on watersheds and contribute to increased carbon sequestration and storage and reduced 
erosion. Strengthening NTFP value chains and institutions with a focus on women, will enhance livelihood diversification 
and improve communities’ resilience to climate change. 

 
25. There is potential for securing climate change finance for on-farm and/ or community investments in 
reforestation and/ or economic trees. HP successfully secured the first ever Clean Development Mechanism subproject 



in project under the Kyoto Protocol was registered with the UNFCCC in March, 2011. This was implemented in 11 
watershed divisions and covering 140 GPs it generated carbon credits trough reforestation activities supported under the 
MHWDP. A scoping assessment supported by the World Bank has identified significant potential for similar carbon 
financing via Indian private sector conglomerates seeking to invest in carbon offsets for their industrial enterprises as well 
as for corporate social responsibility (CSR) motivations.  
 
Subcomponent 2C: Support to farmer groups linked to agri-business clusters 
 
26. This component will promote agribusiness clusters among several GPs in high-potential areas already 
benefitting from project interventions under Component 2. Fostering value addition, agribusiness and agro-industry 
clusters requires coordinated planning and investments by a range of departments. The key objective is typically to 
aggregate production to internalize economies of scale and provide sufficient volume to meet the minimum efficient scale 
of agro-processors hereby stimulating private investment by agribusinesses and promoting value addition. There may be 
other efficiencies for instance in waste treatment and the clustering of ancillary businesses. The project will seek to 
aggregate via clusters in collaboration with farmer organizations (which will also be strengthen under the project). This 
component will coordinate such investments to promote clusters which will connect groups of beneficiary farmers, via 
their respective farmers’ associations, to agribusiness to facilitate processing and value addition.  
 
27. Interventions will include technical assistance to farmers’ groups and prospective agribusinesses as well as 
some (likely modest) infrastructure provision to locate participating agribusinesses. This will fall short of ‘agro-business 
park’ models but could include specific locations for the establishment of agro-businesses close to the producing areas 
and including last-mile infrastructure as well as facilities for storage, packaging and waste management. 
 
Component 3: Institutional capacity building for integrated watershed management and making policy trade-offs. 
 
28. The objective of this component is two-fold: first, is to support a more comprehensive and holist approach to 
managing the state’s water resources recognizing competing uses both within HP and downstream in other states in 
particular Punjab; second to facilitate a better alignment of institutional mandates for IWM and strengthen the HPFD’s 
institutional structure and capacity for improved forest service delivery. It will be implemented through a combination of 
TA and investments.  
 
Subcomponent 3A: Improving the governance structure for integrated watershed management 
 
29. Through the convening power of the HPFD and its role in managing watersheds, this subcomponent will provide 
TA to support improving integrated watershed management (IWM). The subcomponent will support an IWM 
institutional assessment to (a) identify the institutions that affect water supply, quality, use, and management and their 
roles, responsibilities, and mandates; (b) conduct a strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats analysis of the 
current institutional framework and highlight any overlaps and/or gaps that undermine IWM; (c) identify opportunities 
for institutional coordination and synergy; and (d) build consensus on the need for reform and develop the goals and 
vision for institutional collaboration, a time-bound action plan, and an implementation road map. The results of this 
assessment are expected to inform the GoHP on the necessary longer-term reforms to the relevant state institutions that 
will result in effective interagency cooperation and, ultimately, IWM.  
 
Subcomponent 3B: Institutional reform and strengthening of the Himachal Pradesh Forest Department 
 


30. This subcomponent will support the institutional development of HPFD. It will provide TA and investments to (a) 
conduct a functional review of forest institutions (FRFI) that will produce a vision, goal, and time-bound action plan for 
change; (b) implement an initial set of prioritized HPFD institutional reforms; and (c) strengthen the HPFD’s capacity to 
deliver its core mandates. This subcomponent will also support an initial set of prioritized institutional governance reforms 
through TA and investments. These reforms include the (a) development and implementation of a comprehensive HPFD 
IT and knowledge strategy that integrates all relevant applications on a common geospatial platform and allows for 
watershed-level planning;6 (b) development and implementation of a comprehensive HPFD monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) system; (c) establishment of a centralized staff performance monitoring system; and (d) development of regulatory 
and management standards for pastures. Finally, this subcomponent will finance training and capacity-building activities 
based on a comprehensive training plan. The trainings will cover diverse subjects and will be designed with a climate 
change lens to build climate resilience.7 Training will include all project participants. 
 
Subcomponent 3C: Improve water resource coordination and decision making at the macro-level 

 
31. This subcomponent will operationalize some of the opportunities for institutional coordination and increasing 
synergy between the different institutions involved with water resource management, identified in subcomponent 3A. 
Coordination. Successfully managing watersheds and water supply/use, both the upland and downstream areas, will 
require managing tradeoffs between the different treatments, uses and beneficiaries. There are a great number of 
stakeholders involved, including numerous state departments (e.g. HPFD, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, Horticulture, 
Irrigation and Public Health etc.), individuals and the private sector, donor supported projects, NGOs, local governments, 
and local communities. This component will set up a high-level decision-making process (based on improved data collected 
by the project), in a transparent and participatory process to provide strategic guidance and to manage the trade-offs 
necessary to ensure sustainability.  
 
Component 4: Project Management. 

 
32. This component would support the project management function including key staff and operational costs. The 
precise nature of the project management entity is to be determined (see below) although at least in the medium-term 
financing will be required for staff on secondment from other Departments and externally recruited staff in areas with 
skillsets outside the current bureaucratic endowment. A key example is agribusiness for which few existing staff of 
Departments have the required expertise. It would also support the project monitoring and evaluation functions as well 
as grievance redress apparatus, and project communications and outreach including the contribution to Lighthouse India 
by which project lessons can be shared with other states. 
 
33. The component would also support a robust evaluation of impact. The team will consider options for statistically 
robust evaluative techniques (randomized control treatment GPs; discontinuity methodologies utilizing similar treatment 
and control GPs etc.) as a foundation for project evaluation. 

 
Information and Communication Technology 

 
34. The project would specifically seek innovations in information and communication technology (ICT) in all 
aspects of the project (building on experience in other agricultural projects in HP and across India). ICT and geospatial 

                                            
6 The preparation of the IT strategy will include the analysis of the most appropriate disruptive technologies. 
7 The subjects will include management of seed stands, nursery management, range management, forest protection, community 
mobilization, and institutional development. 


analysis would be utilized to inform project planning and implementation and a web-based GIS platform will be established 
to report progress, and to allow stakeholders to report implementation concerns. Furthermore, there are opportunities 
for ICT-based tools to quickly assess soil type (for optimum fertilizer application) which when used offer direct benefits to 
farmers while also helping construct a detailed soil map of the state. Remote monitoring systems can provide real-time 
data on weather, water flows and turbidity and can play important roles in weather-related risk mitigation, irrigation 
scheme-level and farm management decision-making and in project monitoring. The use of blockchain technology is 
increasingly being deployed to facilitate traceability of fresh produce in agricultural value chains and will be encouraged 
by the project. Greater use of cell phone-based market information systems can increase market efficiency and empower 
farmers to supply more remunerative markets and to negotiate higher prices. 
 
Proposed Project Locations 

 
35. Project locations will be identified based on a robust and objective set of criteria. The primary criteria will be to 
identify (i) high priority micro-watersheds that are in urgent need of remedial steps to maintain their perennial water 
sources and then to overlay these with (ii) locations with high potential as agricultural and agribusiness clusters. Once 
these areas are identified, further criteria will be to select specific GPs recognizing the need for a qualitative approach. It 
is expected that in total around 900 GPs will be included. 
 
36. The project will be applied in all districts of HP with the exception of the two high mountain districts of Kinnaur 
and Lahul and Spiti. There are seven main river basins in HP and in principle the project could select micro-watersheds 
within any basin. However, a modified approach will reflect those basins for which activities similar to those proposed in 
Component 1 are already being supported by other Development Partners (DPs) (for instance, KfW supported HP Forest 
Eco-System Climate Proofing Project in Kangra and Chamba Districts and the JICA supported Project for Improvement of 
Himachal Pradesh Forest Ecosystems Management and Livelihoods in Bilaspur, Shimla, Mandi, Kullu, Kinnaur and Lahul 
and Spiti Districts). In such cases, this project would collaborate closely with those interventions, gap-filling Component 1 
where necessary and focusing more on delivery of Component 2. 

 
37. The project will also consider the merits of structured phasing. For instance, one option would be to defer 
interventions in Sutlej basin until the Comprehensive Catchment Area Treatment (CCAT) plan revision is completed as this 
would help better target the resulting investments under Components 1 and 2. Conversely, there may be proposed project 
areas which are already high priority with an underlying analytical foundation for the rapid delivery of interventions under 
Components 1 and 2 (perhaps those in areas supported by KfW and/ or JICA projects). 
 
 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 TBD 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
The project will undertake measures to improve the state of water resources in Himachal Pradesh towards ensuring 
sustainability and climate resilience in the agriculture sector. It will achieve this through interventions across the areas of 



natural resource management, forestry and agriculture. In particular the project will: i) promote participatory and 
sustainable land and water management through strengthened landscape planning and ii) implement NRM activities 
from the plans such as soil and water conservation measures like check dams, bio-engineering structures, etc, 
development of high quality seed stands, nursery development, forest and pasture management and forest fire 
prevention and suppression; iii) provide water through primary and secondary distribution infrastructure and matching 
grants for the purchase of on-farm equipment for drip and sprinkler irrigation technology; iv) support the adoption of 
Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices for existing cropping patterns and facilitate diversification into high value 
crops; v) strengthen NTFP value chains; vi) promote agribusiness clusters including technical assistance to farmers groups 
and infrastructure provision to facilitate storage, packaging, waste management as well as last-mile linkages and vii) 
undertake institutional capacity building for integrated watershed management and making policy trade-offs focusing on 
the Himachal Pradesh Forest Department (HPFD). 
The environmental risk rating of the project is ‘Moderate’. Overall, the impacts of the project financed activities on forest 
cover and quality, water and sediment regulation, water use efficiency and carbon sequestration are expected to be 
positive.keeping in view the proposed activities envisaged at this stage of the project, it is understood that “no adverse 
impacts to critical habitats are expected.” Because activities will be outside critical natural habitats or any activities that 
would impacts on critical habitats will not be financed. No adverse impacts to critical habitats or cultural heritage are 
expected. The risk seems to be moderate. 
Potential for adverse social impacts come from i) infrastructure (aggregation, processing, soil and water conservation, 
water distribution, pasture and nursery development); and ii) access and use restrictions related to natural resource 
management, NTFP value chains and forest fire prevention interventions. Other potential social risks are exclusion of 
small and marginal farmers, nomadic tribes, scheduled castes and scheduled tribes from project institutions and benefits 
that relate to on farm irrigation inputs, seeds and other improved farming inputs and training. Community level conflicts 
could also arise from water sharing infrastructure and systems, any land use restrictions mentioned above.While most 
interventions are likely to be small scale, and the impacts are not expected to be significant, the capacity of the borrower 
to implement and manage the above social risks as well as those related to labor, community health and safety and 
sustained stakeholder engagement raises the risk profile to moderate. 

 

 

























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC10068

Project Name National Agricultural Higher Education Project (P151072)
Region SOUTH ASIA
Country India
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Tertiary education (30%), 

Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (10%), Public administratio n- 
Education (5%), Information technology (5%)

Theme(s) Education for the knowledge economy (35%), Managing for development 
results (5%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Improving labor 
markets (20%), Rural policies and institutions (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151072
Borrower(s) Republic of India
Implementing Agency Indian Council of Agricultural Research
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

17-Mar-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

17-Mar-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

07-Aug-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

27-Oct-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
India is a lower middle-income country with per-capita GDP of US$ 1,499 (2013).  From 2001 to 
2011, India’s economy performed well, with sustained annual GDP growth of 8%.  High rates of 
investment and savings contributed to this growth, as did strong exports. Yet more than 400 million 
people in India still subsist on less than US$ 1.25/day.  India faces challenges in reducing extreme 
poverty, curbing high malnutrition and achieving shared prosperity.  The Government of India has 
emphasized increased farm productivity as fundamental to India’s poverty reduction and growth 
strategy. Building relevant skills sets has been a persistent challenge across the economy.  
Educational institutions, particularly at the tertiary level, are critical to accelerate India’s emergence 

in global markets, yet teaching is poorly linked with labor market demand, research and 
development, thereby producing graduates with limited problem-solving skills.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Agriculture in India employs 52% of the labor force and is the main source of livelihood for 80% of 
the rural poor, but contributes only 14% to GDP and 10% to total exports. Women constitute about 
60% of the economically active population in agriculture and livestock. The Green Revolution in 
the late 1960s and 1970s, with investment in new seeds, production technologies, cultivation 
methods and irrigation practices, improved agricultural productivity and made India food-secure.  
Where the Green Revolution flourished – Haryana and Punjab – are today among the higher income 
states in the country.  However, agricultural productivity growth declined in the 1990s, rebounded 
in the 2000s, and today still remains low. Moreover, this growth has been largely price driven and 
heavily reliant on inputs rather than efficiency gains.  
 
At current Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth, India’s domestic agricultural output will meet 
59% of the country’s 2030 projected food demand (GAP Report 2014).  Agricultural higher 
education can be the engine for increasing productivity through better skilled technicians, 
innovative research and extension linked to technologies and practices, common under the Land 
Grant model.  A 2014 Bank agricultural sector study argues that while India doubled investment in 
agricultural research and extension (0.4% of AgGDP in 1981 to 0.96% in 2011), the quality of 
innovation has suffered along with institutional capacity to adapt and remain relevant.  
Reawakening the “research-education-extension nexus” intrinsic to the Land Grant model can 
propel India’s agricultural innovation, farmers’ technology adoption and agriculture’s overall 
transformation.  In Brazil, for example, the Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education 
Personnel (CAPES) and the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development 
(CNPq) have worked together to build and maintain high-quality faculty in universities nationwide. 
 
The National Agricultural Education System comprises 56 State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), 
one Central Agricultural University, and four Research Institutes with deemed-to-be university 
status.    The first SAU – G. B. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology, Pantanagar – was 
established in 1960 based on the US Land Grant model emphasizing the integration of research, 
education and extension.  Under the Indian Constitution, statutory control of agriculture (including 
agricultural education) lies with the respective State Governments while the Union Government 
coordinates and sets educational standards. In 1996, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) began voluntary SAU accreditation to establish norms and quality standards for agricultural 
higher education.  ICAR continues its financial support to SAUs for accreditation; to date, ICAR 
has accredited 43 SAUs.   
 
The face of Indian agriculture has changed.  Women producers must participate in and benefit from 
agricultural research, education, and extension. There is also growing private sector demand for 
skilled labor in all aspects of agriculture, particularly high-value agro-industry, food processing, and 
specialized knowledge-intensive areas such as water efficiency, food safety, and trade.  A 2014 
assessment of human resource requirements shows an annual deficit of 14,000 in satisfying the 
demand for degree holders in agricultural and allied sciences.   A 2010 National Academy of 
Agriculture Research Management study found a jobs deficit of 50% in agriculture and allied 
sciences relative to the anticipated demand in 2020.   SAUs must adapt to the rapidly changing 
agricultural sector and its increasing knowledge intensity, and prepare the high-quality human 
resources essential for any technology and innovation system to succeed.   



 
Yet the once-impressive SAUs established during the Green Revolution have become less effective 
and less relevant in stimulating transformative change in Indian agriculture. The research-education-
extension synergy — strong in earlier years — has waned substantially and academic inbreeding 
has stunted teaching curricula, eroded faculty quality and weakened research and extension 
outcomes.  As a result, the SAU system is not attracting high-quality students to equip the next 
generation of talent to lead India’s agricultural growth, principally in the private sector. 
ICAR has taken the lead in analyzing the challenges facing agricultural higher education in India.  
This has led to an ambitious reform agenda for SAUs, spelled out in the 2013 Bhubaneshwar 
Declaration, emphasizing: (a) transparent governance; (b) financial and academic autonomy; (c) 
adequate and consistent funding; (d) standards and accreditation; (e) public-private partnerships; (f) 
revamped teaching curricula and methodologies; and (g) international cooperation.   Several 
challenges confront SAUs, among these: 
 
• Poor governance: Vice-chancellors tend to be political appointees and often have little role 
in setting budget priorities or allocations.  Overall accountability is weak and not linked to desired 
academic outcomes. 
• High faculty vacancy rates and pervasive academic inbreeding: Some 56% of SAU faculty 
positions are vacant, with minimal recent recruitment, leading to heavy workloads, poor teaching 
performance and scarce time available for research or extension. Limited contacts with national or 
international centers of excellence and weak linkages with industry, farms and the private sector 
have led to academic stagnation, at a time when competitiveness requires more such interaction. 
There are few incentives to spur faculty productivity in teaching, research or extension. 
• Disconnect between agricultural education and employment: The private sector generates 
nearly one-half of agricultural employment, yet curricula remain focused on the shrinking 
opportunities in the public sector. Importantly, curricula lack a problem-solving orientation. SAUs 
must strengthen job-driven programs, including entrepreneurship-focused courses, to build avenues 
for off-farm work and facilitate technology transfer from lab-to-land.  
• Capital development and financial management:   Salaries comprise up to 90% of SAUs’ 
budgets, funding is almost entirely sourced from the public sector and has not kept pace with 
increasing student admissions.  In contrast, Michigan State University, a model for Indian SAUs, 
sources 10% of its annual budget from public funds. SAUs must begin to raise their own resources 
through fee-based/market-oriented programs, sales of proprietary seed/planting material, 
consultancies and capital development initiatives. 
• Meeting globalization: Greater infusion of frontier science subjects (e.g., biotechnology, 
nanotechnology, precision and climate-resilient agriculture, information and communication 
technology), good trade practices, ethics of intellectual property rights and genetically modified 
crops, and market intelligence have become critical to promote efficiency, awareness, equity, and 
competitiveness in agriculture as India strives to cement its role as a global player in agriculture. 
• Forging service market development: Staffing of Agricultural Technology Management 
Agencies (ATMAs) and Krishi Vigyan Kendras-KVKs (Agriculture Science Centers) and other 
professional private and public agricultural service providers will require business and technical 
skills to meet the knowledge demanded by farmers, particularly women.  
 
The World Bank and ICAR have a long and fruitful collaboration, most recently through the 
National Agricultural Innovation Project (NAIP), National Agricultural Technology Project (NATP) 
and sector work.  The current ICAR reform priorities require further refinement and focus, and 
ICAR has requested World Bank support as a knowledge adjunct to the proposed project. 

The challenges faced by SAUs mirror those faced in general by higher education in India.  The 
needs of the agricultural sector resonate with other sectors, i.e., highly trained workforce and 
relevant cutting-edge research.  The Bank’s Agriculture and Education Global Practices are 
collaborating on the proposed project to ensure that the SAU reform process benefits from 
innovations in both sectors across India and internationally.  Through strategic priority interventions 
at the Central and State levels, the proposed project would have far-reaching and long-term impacts 
on agricultural higher education in India.  The project would also incorporate disbursement-linked 
Indicators (DLIs) to build time-bound financial incentives for SAUs and ICAR in pursuit of the 
proposed reform agenda.

Relationship to CAS
The proposed project supports the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 2013-17 and addresses the 
three engagement areas of integration, transformation and inclusion. These engagement areas 
foresee increased agricultural productivity and also support quality improvements of higher 
education to create a more skilled workforce that continuously improves the productivity of key 
sectors, including agriculture.   Further, by working with SAUs in low-income states, the proposed 
project supports the CPS strategy of improving their economic performance.  
 
The proposed project is a multi-Global Practice collaboration (Agriculture and Education) and is 
expected to support activities and results directly related to cross-cutting strategic areas of climate 
change, jobs, gender and public-private partnerships.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project development objective is to increase educational relevance and quality in selected State 
Agricultural Universities. 
 
Equity, especially gender and caste-based equity, is a cross-cutting theme of the proposed project 
and would be tracked through the key performance indicators.

Key Results (From PCN)
The following key performance indicators are proposed: 
 
1. Percentage change in SAU faculty scientific effectiveness as measured by h-index [quality]; 
2. Percentage change in level and source(s) of SAU revenue [quality]; 
3. Increased awareness and uptake of locally-relevant agricultural research [relevance];  
4. Increased student retention rates, disaggregated by gender and SC/ST [quality, relevance 
and equity]; and  
5. Increased satisfaction rates of students, farmers and agribusinesses with SAU curricula and 
service provision [quality and relevance].

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project addresses strategic reforms in agricultural higher education at the state level 
(targeting SAUs) and the central level (focused on ICAR).  Selected SAUs would pilot a range of 
innovations in education, research and extension under diverse settings.   In so doing, these SAUs 


will test options to create 21st century educational institutions to successfully meet the current and 
future challenges facing India’s agricultural sector. These institutions will attract a diverse cadre of 
high-quality students, train them with labor-market relevant skills, nurture research talent and 
ensure knowledge flows between lab and land. The second set of reforms will empower ICAR by 
strengthening its capacity to provide strategic support to SAUs nationwide.     
 
The project would likely consist of three components: 
 
Component 1 – Support to State Agricultural Universities – addresses the need to raise educational 
quality and relevance in SAUs and create knowledge and technology hubs for priority themes in 
support of agricultural transformation.  The component, which would absorb most of project 
finance, would have two sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 1a – Investments toward 21st Century State Agricultural Universities – would 
target reform-ready SAUs and States (applying verifiable criteria) and support Institutional 
Development Plans (IDPs), developed through multi-stakeholder processes, that undertake key 
governance reforms, finance new and refurbished research and teaching facilities, curricula and 
faculty development, training for administrators, strengthening locally relevant research, student 
placement and technical assistance. Supported IDPs would also emphasize universities’ exploring of 
alternative income streams, such as: tuition; alumni contributions; competitively-selected research 
projects; patents; joint ventures; extension services; consultancy services; and special courses for 
mid-career professionals. These diverse activities would not only generate own financial resources 
for SAUs, but also link them to the national and global knowledge economy, thereby further 
enhancing their relevance.  By focusing on income-earning capacity, SAUs would also create 
openings for sustained private sector participation.  Suitable twinning arrangements with foreign 
universities would also be explored, as would innovative pilots for research dissemination and 
mechanisms for internal revenue generation.  
 
Sub-component 1b – Investments in Centers for Advanced Agricultural Science and Technology – 
would support SAUs in establishing interdisciplinary centers for teaching, research and extension on 
critical agriculture and rural development topics (e.g., agricultural adaptation to climate change; 
land and water use efficiency, scalable technology and mechanization, agro-industry, agro-
entrepreneurship).  Multi-stakeholder consultations would inform the selection of geographic 
locations and core themes under the sub-component.  The sub-component would finance research 
and teaching equipment, faculty and scientist development fellowships, scholarships, and costs 
associated with twinning arrangements with similar centers outside and within India. 
 
Component 2 – Investments in ICAR for Leadership in Agricultural Higher Education – would: (a)  
empower ICAR by financing its own internal reforms to enhance its effectiveness in coordinating, 
guiding and managing agricultural research and education nationwide; and (b) support ICAR in its 
interactions with SAUs and key stakeholders nationwide through interventions that increase the 
quality and relevance of agricultural education.   The component would have two sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 2a – Investments in ICAR to support excellence in SAUs – would leverage ICAR’s 
comparative advantage in assessing systemic challenges ac ross all SAUs and incubating solutions.  
Among the interventions financed would be: (a) digital information systems for SAU data collection 
and analysis to improve quality metrics in agricultural higher education; (b) an improved curricula 
review process to tighten its relevance in today’s dynamic job market; (c) enhanced methods to 



consolidate and disseminate global best-practices (e.g., benchmarking) in agricultural higher 
education; and (d) institutionalization of stakeholder and advisory inputs to better inform research, 
education and extension across the SAU system.          
Subcomponent 2b – ICAR innovation grants to SAUs – would be open to all SAUs nationwide and  
support interventions that would include: (a) quality assurance (e.g., accreditation); (b) next-
generation management information and financial management systems to increase transparency 
and administrative efficiency; (c) campus student placement offices to facilitate stronger linkages 
between academics and future employment opportunities; (d) theme-based competitive grants to 
students, faculty and academic departments to promote inter-state and international collaboration, 
including matching funds from the private sector; and (e) needs-based equipment, training and 
technical assistance.  
 
Component 3 – Project Management and Learning – would support ICAR’s project management, 
primarily through its Education Division, to administer, supervise, monitor and evaluate overall 
project implementation.  The component would also support the formation of an external advisory 
board to guide ICAR throughout project implementation.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 165.00 Total Bank Financing: 82.50
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 82.50
 International Development Association (IDA) 82.50
 T

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Land Allocation for Social and Economic Development Project III (P171331) 

 
 

  
Jun 16, 2019 Page 1 of 10  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Jun-2019 | Report No: PIDC27269 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Cambodia P171331  Land Allocation for 
Social and Economic 
Development Project III 
(P171331) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Feb 28, 2020 Jun 19, 2020 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Kingdom of Cambodia Ministry of Land 
Management Urban 
Planning and Construction 
(MLMUPC), Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries (MAFF), National 
Committee for Sub-National 
Democratic and 
Development Secretariat 
(NCDDS) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to help improve target beneficiaries' access to agriculture resources and selected 
infrastructure and social services in project communities. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 70.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 60.00 

Financing Gap 30.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 



     International Development Association (IDA) 60.00 

          IDA Credit 60.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 10.00 

          Borrower/Recipient 10.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

High  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Over the past two decades, Cambodia has undergone a significant transition, reaching lower middle-
income economy by raising its per capita income from USD 250 in 1995 to an estimated USD 1,230 in 2017. Driven 
by garment exports and tourism, Cambodia has sustained an average growth rate of 7.7% between 1995-2018, 
ranking sixth in the world1, among the fastest-growing economies in the world and has achieved impressive gains in 
poverty reduction. As global demand peaks in 2018, economic growth is estimated to have reached 7.5%, compared 
to 7% in 2017. Growth is expected to remain robust over the medium term. Growth was accompanied by a significant 
decline in poverty incidence, which dropped from 47 percent in 2007 to about 13 percent in 2013 thanks largely to 
high agriculture commodity prices globally as well as strong job creation in manufacturing and services. Around 3.6 
million jobs in industry and services were created over the past two decades. Cambodia’s growth has been pro-poor. 
The percentage of Cambodians living under the national poverty line fell from 47.8 percent in 2007 to 13.5 percent 
in 2014, according to official estimates. The Gini coefficient declined to 0.30 in 2014 from 0.34 in 2009. Cambodia 
has made significant progress in attaining the Millennium Development Goals. Since 1990, the country has more than 
halved extreme poverty and maternal mortality, achieved nearly universal primary education enrollment, and made 
significant progress in combating HIV/AIDS. Poverty reduction was particularly dramatic from 2007 to 2009, when 
poverty declined by 25 percentage points and 3.3 million people escaped poverty, owing in large part to an expansion 
of cultivated area and high international food prices which benefited both farmers and agriculture workers. 

2. Among the main drivers of growth have been exports of goods and services and foreign capital inflows. 
Since opening its economy to international trade and capital flows in 1992, Cambodia has become one of the East 
Asian countries most open to trade and foreign investment. Exports of goods and services grew at an average of 18 
percent during 1994-2017, with Cambodia ranking 4th in the world in exports during that period. Notably, its export 

                                            
1 World Development Indicators. Four countries that experienced a recession during this period are excluded.  


 

success is driven by a few products, with final garments and footwear accounting for nearly three-quarters of total 
exports and has been facilitated by preferential access to key markets. Cambodia is also among the top countries in 
the world in terms of attracting foreign direct investment (FDI), which has facilitated entry into some global value 
chains (GVCs).  
 
3. With an aspiration to become an upper middle-income country by 2030, Cambodia needs to strengthen 
its existing drivers, which are weakening, while building new drivers of growth. The end of the commodity super-
cycle, coupled with adverse weather shocks, have resulted in a sharp slowdown in agriculture growth. Meanwhile, 
Cambodia’s labor-intensive, export-oriented garment and tourism sectors are facing rising wages and greater 
competition from abroad. There is evidence that all merchandise export growth, tourist arrivals, as well as FDI into 
manufacturing have slowed during 2013-2017.  Moreover, the EU is considering the suspension of preferential 
market access for Cambodian exports under the Everything-but-Arms (EBA) scheme, which could mean tariffs of 
about 12 percent for Cambodian garment exports, threatening sector competitiveness. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
4. Growth has also been driven by the country’s rich and diverse natural capital, which supports the 
livelihoods of millions of Cambodians. Agriculture, which depends heavily on natural resources and ecosystem 
services, contributed 27% of the annual gross domestic product (GDP) in 2018. More than five million people depend 
on agriculture and fisheries, to supplement their income and support their food security, and 88 percent of the 
population still relies on traditional biomass for cooking. Cambodians are also the largest consumers of freshwater 
fish per capita, with fish and other aquatic resources contributing to 37 percent of total protein consumption. 
Tourism, another engine of economic growth, is also becoming increasingly dependent on natural resources and 
environment. 
 
5. Going forward, Cambodia may not be able to rely on the same factors that drove strong growth and 
poverty reduction over the past two decades. In the case of agriculture, the outlook for commodity prices is not 
positive, and Cambodia’s scope for further gains in cultivated area is more limited nowadays, especially considering 
the need for environmental sustainability. Risks posed by the degradation of natural resources could affect economic 
sustainability. It is crucial to maintain and develop natural resources while strengthening climate resilience. Low 
prices for agricultural commodities along with rising salaries will require improvements in productivity to remain 
competitive. Given the continued importance of the agricultural sector to growth and poverty reduction, Cambodia 
will need to foster a gradual transformation of the sector through intensification, diversification, and value addition. 
The public sector could facilitate expanded irrigation, knowledge, and technology adoption in collaboration with the 
private sector and strategies of quality differentiation by enhancing systems for managing quality and food safety 
and introducing an overall coherent approach to ‘brand’ Cambodian food and agriculture.  
 
6. The benefits of economic growth and the reduction of poverty has not been shared equitably among 
Cambodian citizens. Disparities in income and access to opportunities remain, particularly in rural communities. 
Rural communities which are still heavily relying on land, forests, and other natural resources for their livelihoods are 
still faced with widespread poverty in rural Cambodia.  Landlessness and access to natural resources remains a 
problem. 
7. Inequality in ownership and/or access to productive assets such as land is a major concern because it 
implies the likelihood of a trend to growing inequality of production, income and consumption in the future. In the 
absence of dramatic expansion of off-farm employment or livelihood opportunities to absorb landless labor, the 

concentration of land in fewer hands implies a growing gap in the opportunities available to different types of 
households.  
 
8. Key reforms are needed for Cambodia to sustain pro-poor growth, foster country’s competitiveness, 
sustainably manage natural resource wealth and improve access to and quality of public services. Cambodia 
continues to have a serios infrastructure gap and would benefit from greater connectivity and investing in rural and 
urban infrastructure is essential.  
 
9. The Royal Government of Cambodia is making growing efforts to address landlessness and tenure 
insecurity, including increasing Indigenous Communal Land Titling (ICLT). Commune-based and national Social Land 
Concession projects, both Government and donor funded have been established, addressing rural poverty and 
providing a social safety net or retirement benefit for demobilized soldiers. Where accompanied by adequate 
infrastructure and service provision, these projects have shown to be able to provide sustainable livelihoods. 
However, needs (and demands) of landless and tenure-insecure population groups and the challenges in addressing 
them remain significant. Landlessness and poverty remaining an issue in rural areas. 
 
10. Under the original LASED and the second phase LASED II projects, participatory planning of agriculture 
and livelihood activities has progressively led to the adoption of good practices in agriculture production in the 
land recipient communities. 5,000ha of agricultural land are newly under perennial or annual crops, on 3,000ha 
beneficiaries apply improved production technologies that help raising incomes and protect natural resources.    
Accompanying investments in infrastructure, including the planned and ongoing support to small-scale irrigation 
schemes, have further increased sustainability of agriculture-based livelihoods, making sure products and production 
processes respond to market demands and are resilient to the short and long-term climate changes affecting the 
areas. At the same time, road linkages to and from the SLC areas benefit not only the direct land recipients but many 
more stakeholders that travel to and from the area, providing new business opportunities, decreasing transaction 
costs, and stimulating economic and social exchange.  A new, third phase and project would expand and extend 
activities and benefits to new target groups in new provinces.  
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

11. The Project supports the achievement of the World Bank’s twin goals to end extreme poverty and promote 
shared prosperity through its emphasis on expanding the benefits of poverty-targeted land distribution and 
infrastructure and service provision, as well as reduce climate risk vulnerability to a broader segment of the poor and 
marginalized population in rural areas.  The Project is also consistent with, and part of the World Bank Group’s Country 
Partnership Framework (CPF) for Cambodia 2019-2023 which received Board approval in May 2019.  Furthermore, it 
supports the objectives in the government’s Rectangular Strategy IV (RS4), particularly the objectives of poverty 
reduction, agriculture development, diversification and commercialization, and improving rural infrastructure and 
services. The project supports the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 1 on eradicating extreme 
poverty and SDG 2 on preventing hunger and improving nutrition. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
12. The project development objective is to help improve target beneficiaries' access to agriculture resources 
and selected infrastructure and social services in project communities.  

Key Results (From PCN) 


13. The key results that the Project would achieve include: 

 

• Tenure security for formerly landless or land-poor, and other marginalized groups or individuals, i.e. 
indigenous communities. 
Achievements would be measured by the number of registered land rights (including titles) and the area 
(ha) that was provided to beneficiaries.  

• Infrastructure and service provision in the project areas, benefitting not only the direct target group but 
supporting broader area development. 
Achievements would be measured by the number of people that live along newly built or upgraded 
roads and who benefit from improved connectivity and market access. 

• Sustainable, agriculture-based livelihood development for individuals and groups in the project 
communities. 
Achievements would be measured by increased incomes from farming, and improved food security (and 
nutrition) amongst the target beneficiary families.  

 
14. With a potentially nation-wide coverage, implementation will focus on the existing LASED provinces, plus 
the Northeastern Provinces of Mondulkiri, Rattanakiri, Stung Treng and Preah Vihear.  A total of 30-40 project sites 
(sub-projects) would be included, covering a total of approximately 10,000 -15,000 direct beneficiary households.  
Benefits from improved infrastructure availability and usage will accrue to a broader beneficiary group in the project 
areas. 

D. Concept Description 
 

Component 1: Social Land Concession (SLC) and Indigenous Communal Land Titling (ICLT) Investment 
Planning and Prioritization (approx. US$20million) 

 
15. This would continue support for: (a) participatory preparation and updating of SLC or ICLT plans for the new, 
and where necessary also existing sites, respectively; (b) identification, prioritization and planning of appropriate 
technology and infrastructure investments, including the collection of project baseline data at additional sites, and 
responding to increased monitoring requirements; and (c) processing of individual SLC land titles for eligible land 
recipients in the existing sites. Additional and adjusted activities would include (d) facilitating incorporation of climate 
smart/climate change resilience considerations, and where appropriate specific NRM protection in new and or 
existing land use plans for project areas; and (e) processing of communal land titles in areas where the project sites 
include indigenous communities with respective demands. 

Component 2: Land Preparation and Infrastructure Development (approx. US$50million) 
 
16. This would support the settling-in requirements as well as the required land preparation and prioritized 
infrastructure investments at new project sites. These include the: (a) provision of settling-in assistance to newly-
installed land recipients; (b) provision of initial land preparation assistance including a first cover crop; and (c) 
provision of productive/economic and social community infrastructure investments such as rural roads, small-scale 
irrigation systems, water supply and sanitation facilities, school buildings, teachers’ houses, health posts and 
community centers, among others. Based on the experiences in existing SLC areas and responding to the significant 
infrastructure gaps in rural areas expected to be encountered at the proposed new project areas, it is expected that 

the Project’s largest investments would be provided for rural climate resilient roads, with benefits of those expanding 
beyond the direct beneficiaries, including entire communes and areas.  With the substantial increase in project area, 
the absolute amount for infrastructure investments will be considerably larger than under LASED II.  The second 
largest item for project investments concerns water infrastructures, both for climate change resilient small-scale 
irrigation schemes or water reservoirs and for provision of safe water supply and sanitation.  

Component 3: Agriculture and Livelihood Development (approx. US$20million) 
 
17. This would primarily support the improvement of climate-change resilient agricultural production systems, 
livelihoods and food security of new land recipients, including facilitation and provision of support services and 
technical assistance. These would include support for: (a) community organizing and development; (b) provision of 
agricultural service and extension support following a pluralistic service provider approach; (c) establishment of 
farmer-managed demonstration plots and model farms; (d) establishment and/or strengthening of farmers 
organization, agriculture cooperatives, production and marketing groups and other community interest groups; and 
(e) provision of community fund to strengthen successful local initiatives. Agriculture and livelihood support would 
be adjusted, where applicable, to the specific sociocultural and biophysical environments of new project areas, in 
particular in IP areas. Promotion of nutrition-sensitive agriculture will be part of the training curricula prepared and 
implemented by MAFF and PDAFF.  Adaptation and expansion of existing MAFF materials on nutrition-sensitive 
agriculture production will be part of the support.  

18. The Project will build on the experiences with LASED interventions, which highlight the need of strong 
agriculture development support to quickly integrate farming systems into the local and wider economy, 
strengthening agriculture-based livelihoods and provide quick returns and strong incentives to land recipients.  
Taking into consideration that additional project locations under the Project will include areas in provinces with 
important natural habitats, the Project will incorporate in its agriculture and livelihood development plans activities 
for protecting private, communal and public lands.  Where applicable, community forestry activities will be supported 
alongside private agriculture activities.   

19. An additional focus of agriculture and livelihood development under LASED III will be a specific response to 
climate change challenges.  In order to (further) strengthen the resilience of agriculture and food systems in the 
existing and new sites under the Project, responses to short- and long-term climate changes will be an integral part 
of support.  This will particularly include irrigation and water management support, integrating site specific planning 
into ongoing or prospective broader area development approaches.  

Component 4: Project Management, Coordination and M&E (approx. US$10million) 
 

20. This component would support adjusted project administration and coordination activities. It would ensure 
in particular the timely and transparent flow of funds, procurement, auditing and reporting. It would also support 
project implementing entities at all levels (including the new provinces and new communes) to establish (where 
needed) and strengthen their fiduciary, administrative and reporting capacities. Clear assignments for procurement 
and FM responsibilities of each IA will guide effective an efficient implementation. Ministry of Land Management 
Urban Planning and Construction (MLMUPC) will be the executing agency, with participation from the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), National Committee for Sub-National Democratic and Development 
Secretariat (NCDDS) as implementing agencies for this proposed project.  They will carry out procurement activities 
at national level for their respective activities in the components and sub-components, respectively.  Communes and 
communities will carry out procurement activities at the sub-national levels if and as applicable.  

21. Specific attention and support would also be provided to adapt and strengthen the Project’s M&E system, 
and further expand and enhance the Project and SLC/ICLT-related management information system as input to the 
site planning and prioritization. Support would include technical assistance, training, incremental operating costs, 
vehicles and equipment, among others. 

    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
The overall environmental and social risk classification is high. The screening of risks and impacts is based on discussion 
with the task team, consultations and observations undertaken during a mission, secondary data, and specialist 
experience with LASED II. 
 
The project will support the process for SLC and ICLT, establishment of sustainable infrastructure and livelihood systems 
including land preparation, provision of social and economic infrastructure, agriculture support and livelihood 
development. Restrictions on access to land and natural and cultural resources resulting from these activities may impact 
on nature-based livelihoods and tenure of vulnerable or marginal households and communities where decisions may not 
be managed in a participatory manner. While the project aims to deliver a range of benefits including economic 
development and community livelihood opportunities, project activities have the potential to generate significant social 
impacts, direct and indirect, due to the range of activities related to land consolidation, indigenous community lands, 
agriculture and infrastructure. The scale of the proposed activities, across sensitive locations (indigenous areas) and new 
focus on ICLT presents risks related to collective registration of indigenous communities’ lands.  
 
Nine of the standards have be screened as relevant. Standard ESS9 on Financial Intermediaries is not considered 
relevant. 
 
The implementing agencies have good competency in implementing projects in accordance with national requirements 
and World Bank Safeguards Policies but have less familiarity with and experience in delivering projects in line with the 
Environmental and Social Framework. Prior to project appraisal an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) 
will be prepared which will take into account the need to ensure budget, staffing and operational arrangements for 
project environmental and social risk management. For new sites involving indigenous communities as sole beneficiaries, 
to understand and address project related risks and impacts, a social assessment will be prepared prior to appraisal to 
inform project design and project level social risk management framework, also to be prepared prior to appraisal. The 
assessment will inform revisions to existing social risk management frameworks and plans, including on stakeholder 
engagement, at both project and community level. 

 

 

























































World Bank Document


PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC27800

Project Name Guangxi Rural Poverty Alleviation Pilot Project (P153892)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s) Other rural development (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), 

Rural markets (40%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153892
Borrower(s) PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Implementing Agency Guangxi Foreign Capital Poverty Reduction Project Management Center
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

29-Jun-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

30-Jun-2015

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

30-Jun-2016

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

15-Dec-2016

Concept Review 
Decision

Track I - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Background. China's success in reducing extreme poverty during the economic reform period 
(1978?2014) is widely recognized. Over the last three decades, China has lifted over 750 million 
people out of poverty, which represents 89 percent of global poverty reduction during that period. 
World Bank estimates show that the number of absolute poor (that is, those people consuming less 
than $1.25 per day in PPP terms) in China declined from 84 percent in 1981 to 6.3 percent in 2011. 
Based on different poverty lines, official government estimates confirm a similar sharp decline in 
poverty over these years, and the number of the people who lived on less than US$2 per day was 
approximately 367 million or 27.2 percent of the total population. Using China's rural poverty line 
of annual per capital net income below CNY 2,300 (2010 constant process and which is slightly 
above the 1.25US$/day in PPP terms), the number of poor people living in rural areas declined to 
70.2 million in 2014. This represents continued decline of rural poverty from 17.2 percent in 2010 
to 8.5 percent in 2013. 

 
Economic growth has been a key driver for poverty reduction in China. From 1981 to 2011, real 
GDP per capita grew at average annual rate of 9.1 percent. The relationship between annualized 
GDP growth and poverty reduction during this period suggests that poverty headcount index 
(measured by US$ 1.25 per capita PPP line) fell annually by 0.99 percentage points for each 
percentage point increase of the GDP per capita. Improvements in access to public services, such as 
education and health, has been another driver of poverty reduction. All levels of education, 
employment in non-agricultural activities, and migration have been identified as critical forces 
driving poverty reduction. 
 
Geographically, the remaining pockets of poverty, including chronic poverty, are largely 
concentrated in rural areas, especially in mountainous and remote areas in western provinces of 
China with ethnic minorities. These areas are usually characterized by challenging natural 
environment with water scarcity, low soil fertility and poor endowment with natural resources. The 
Government has classified 14 zones (crossing provincial boundaries) as the focus for its poverty 
alleviation efforts. The 14 zones contain 680 nationally designated poverty counties which benefit 
from special financial support under the government??s rural poverty alleviation programs. Majority 
of these poverty counties are concentrated in mountainous areas of central and western China and 
among ethnic minority and other disadvantaged groups, including people with disabilities and 
elderly.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
Guangxi ranks the fifth province in the nation in terms of the absolute poor numbers.  Out of its 
total population of 52.4 million in 2013 there were 6.3 million poor people Guangxi which gives 
poverty incidence rate of 14.9 percent.  Majority of these poor live in rural areas and over 80 
percent of the poor people are from ethnic minority groups. Some 17.1 million people belong to 
various ethnic minority groups, making it a largest ethnic minority population in China. The 
province has 28 national level designated poverty counties and it is a recipient of a significant 
portion of national poverty reduction funds from the central government. In 2013, the net income 
per capita in these counties remained 59.6 percent of the national average.  The main causes of the 
poverty are low levels of human capital (poor education attainment levels and lack of skills needed 
to participate in modern economy) in particular in mountainous rural areas; poor natural resources 
base and limited infrastructure (roads, water and electricity). 
 
China has seen a rapid growth in the number of farmer cooperatives since the Law on Specialized 
Farmer Cooperatives promulgated in 2006. In March 2015 there were about 1.3 million specialized 
cooperatives in China. In some of the proposed project counties, formally registered cooperatives 
were almost non-existent before 2009. Their numbers are now growing rapidly and cooperatives are 
allowing both enhanced presence of the agribusiness sector and small entrepreneur initiatives. 
However, while most cooperatives are now recognized as economic entities, they are often small-
scale and lack management skills. The project is expected to benefit from the national legal 
framework for farmer cooperatives, which is expected to be updated in 2015.

Relationship to CAS
The proposed project is consistent with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), approved in 2012.  
The project would support the CPS's strategic theme two: promoting more inclusive development, 
by geographically focusing on lagging regions and small towns and by supporting policies and 
demonstration projects that address inequalities. It would contribute to the CPS outcome 2.3: 


enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, by piloting new ways to boost rural incomes 
and reduce poverty under the umbrella of the new Poverty Reduction for China's Rural Areas 
Strategy (2011-2020) and by promoting inclusive innovation to decrease disparities.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The proposed PDO is to increase income opportunities for rural households in selected poverty 
counties of Guangxi.

Key Results (From PCN)
The achievement of the PDO would be measured by: (a) the number of project beneficiaries joining 
a new organizational arrangement decomposed by poverty levels and gender; and (b) the number of 
project supported cooperatives making profit.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
Project Area: The proposed project areas are located in the rural areas of the Dian Gui Mountain 
Degraded Area. Within this area 10project counties under the two cities of Baise and Hechi are 
proposed. These include: Tiandong, Tianlin, Leye, Donglan, Bama, Fengshan, Dahua, and Pingguo 
County, and Yizhou City. All of the selected counties/city are characterized by a particular high 
level of poverty combined with poor natural resource conditions, difficulties in water management, 
limited availability of farm land,low levels of technology and a high percentage of ethnic minorities. 
 
Proposed Project Components: The proposed project would consist of the following four 
components with a preliminary cost estimate of US$182 million including a Bank loan of US$100 
million and counterpart funding of about US$82 million equivalent implemented over five years: 
 
a) Component 1: Improvement of Pro-Poor Value Chains. The component aims to address 
market failures in the development of agricultural and non-agricultural rural value chains and key 
industries with a particular focus on linking poor rural households with higher value markets. The 
component would finance the Cooperative Development Fund (CDF), which would provide grant 
financing to newly or existing cooperatives. It would also aim to establish Competitive Grant Fund 
for Enterprises which would provide matching grants to finance enterprise investments in order to 
demonstrate linkages and benefit sharing with poor farmers/households.  
 
b) Component 2: Improving Public Infrastructure and Services. The component would support 
the establishment and strengthening of public infrastructure and service systems in support of value 
chain/key industry development under the Component 1. It would provide financing for rural 
infrastructure such as rural roads, small-scale irrigation and drainage infrastructure, small water 
storage facilities, land levelling, IT infrastructure, public market facilities, etc. The component 
would also support public services, such as product certification, developing and registration of 
local/regional brands, branding and protection of ethnic minority product features, market and 
production risk management as well as strategic product marketing and promotion.  
 
c) Component 3: Enhancing Investments in Poor Areas. The component would improve and 
facilitate investments in poor areas by existing and new entrepreneurs and business entities such as 
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), migrant returnees, or cooperatives through establishing 



business incubation centers and risk management instruments.  
 
d) Component 4: Project Management and M&E. The component would strengthen and 
develop the administrative and technical capacity of staff of the Project Management Offices. It 
would aim to establish a monitoring and evaluation and impact evaluation system

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 182.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 82.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 100.00
 Total 182.00

VI. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Paavo Eliste
Title: Lead Rural Development Special
Tel: 5788+7681 /
Email: peliste@worldbank.org

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Contact: Licheng Yao (Mr.)
Title: Director, Ministry of Finance
Tel: 86-10-68552064
Email: yaolicheng@sina.com

Implementing Agencies
Name: Guangxi Foreign Capital Poverty Reduction Project Management Center






























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA15898

Project Name Agricultural Development Support Project (P147629)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country Myanmar
Sector(s) Irrigation and drainage (40%), Agricultural extension and research 

(30%), Crops (30%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Other rural development 

(20%), Climate change (20%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P147629
Borrower(s) Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 22-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 23-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

24-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

23-Apr-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
Myanmar is the largest country in mainland Southeast Asia with a land area of about 654,000 
square km. It is located between Bangladesh, China, India, Lao PDR, and Thailand, with more than 
2,800 miles of coastline. It is also one of the poorest countries in East Asia, with an estimated 
poverty headcount between 26 and 37 percent, depending on the methodology used, among its 
population of around 52 million. The new government which took in office in March 2011 has 
introduced sweeping political and economic reforms. Myanmar is now embarking on a triple 
transition: from an authoritarian military system to democratic governance; from a centrally 
directed economy to a market-based economy; and from 60 years of conflict to peace in the border 
areas. From a strategic point of view, agriculture is of central importance for achieving the twin 
goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity in Myanmar. The sector accounts 
for about 36 percent of the GDP, which is largest share of GDP among ASEAN members. Rice 
production constitutes about 30 percent of agricultural GDP and covers 70 percent of cultivated 
land. The sector generates about 53 percent of total employment and is source of livelihoods for 
about 70 percent of population who live in rural areas. The poverty headcount, which ranges from 
26 to 37 percent depending on methodologies, is highest in upland areas, but in absolute terms most 

rural poor live in the Dry Zone (34 percent), followed by the Delta region (25 percent), according to 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic carried out by the World Bank Group in 2014. In the lowland 
areas of the Delta and the Dry Zones where population densities are highest, poverty is associated 
with landlessness or limited farmland holdings. The rural poor in these areas depend primarily on 
farm income generation and on-farm seasonal and other informal labor opportunities. Among the 
rural households who own land persistent poverty stems from a combination of low productivity of 
farming systems and high vulnerability of these systems to adverse weather events, especially 
drought in areas featuring limited or unreliable access to irrigation services. The government places 
high priority on the development of the agriculture sector and sees it as the basis for food security, 
poverty reduction, job creation, and export promotion.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
Myanmar has a favorable agricultural potential. It has abundant water resources -- 20,870 m3 per 
person compared to the Asia-wide average of 3,948 m3 per person -- and relatively abundant 
agricultural land, which translates into the highest agricultural land per worker in the East Asia and 
Pacific (EAP) region of about 1.1 ha/worker, compared to 0.8 ha/worker in Thailand and Cambodia 
and less than half of Myanmar figure in Vietnam and Indonesia). According to the Myanmar 
Census of Agriculture (2010), the average farm area is 2.6 hectares, which is the second largest in 
EAP after Thailand (3.1 ha) (and about five times of that prevailing in Vietnam’s Mekong Delta 
region). Finally, it has diverse agro-ecological conditions which would allow it to produce a wide 
range of temperate, sub-tropical and tropical crops. The current agricultural productivity is 
constrained by under-supply of public services (extension, basic education), low levels of 
technology adaption and farm mechanization, insecure irrigation water supply, limited access to 
affordable credit suitable for agricultural production cycles, and rising labor costs that have trapped 
farmers in poverty even within double cropping systems in irrigated areas. There is a lack of an 
overarching and clear agricultural sector strategy in Myanmar to guide public sector and donor 
spending programs. The effectiveness of current public spending programs is also affected by the 
nature of agricultural services provided to smallholders. Too often, public goods and services 
provided to farmers, such as irrigation and extension, are supply driven with little consideration of 
farmer interests.  For example, farmers’ crop choices could be sometimes restricted by local 
authorities at regional and district level who make decisions on water allocations. The limited 
extension services are often focused on the promotion a single crop rather than helping farmers to 
overcome problems they are facing in their farming systems, such as soil infertility and fertilizer 
use, pest management, increasing labor cost, etc. At the same time, farmers’ incentives to invest in 
better water, soil and crop management technologies may be constrained by their lack of security on 
water and land use rights, as well as issues related to the underdeveloped marketing systems and 
high volatility of agricultural prices. Many irrigation schemes function below their potential 
because of inappropriate operation of reservoirs and a lack of responsive irrigation system 
management.  For example, while about 2 million hectares are equipped with irrigation and 
drainage infrastructure, a second crop is being grown on only about 28 percent of this area 
(2011/12). This may reflect both technical deficiencies as well as uncertainties farmers are facing in 
marketing their crops. While primary irrigation structures (dams, canals) seem in general in good 
shape there are problems in getting water to farmer fields. With improved management and a 
change in cropping patterns, including to non-rice crops, it is possible to expand the cropping areas 
and cropping intensity. This may necessitate minor structural alterations to the irrigation schemes to 
improve drainage and, for some fields, to which improves in-field drainage through land leveling. 
However, improving irrigation management is not sufficient to increase farm incomes. This is 

because farmers often do not possess the necessary agronomic technologies and skills to take 
advantage of an improved access to irrigation. The current public extension system is under-
resourced and extension personnel rarely visit farmers to provide advice on the correct fertilizers 
rates to use improved technologies such as improved seeds. There is also some reluctance by 
farmers to change from growing rice to more water efficient crops, such as legumes and sesame. 
This may be partly caused by the rigidity of irrigation systems which does not offer enough 
flexibility in on-field water delivery and thus result in a lack of control over water levels on 
individual farm plots. The general under-capitalization of smallholder farming systems in Myanmar 
caused by decades of public under-investment and policy inefficiency fuels the risk of a vicious 
cycle of declining terms of trade. The development of smallholder agriculture in Myanmar thus 
requires significant public investments in institutional development, technology generation and 
dissemination, rural infrastructure, and human capital for years to come.  The Ministry of 
Agriculture and Irrigation (MOAI) has made significant investments in irrigation infrastructure bet 
ween the 1980s and 2000s which can serve as platform for development of smallholder farming 
systems. Many of these schemes host large numbers of smallholders who have the potential to 
respond to public investments under a supportive environment. These schemes would offer good 
opportunities for landscape-based rural development approaches that address agricultural, natural 
resource management, and social development goals.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to increase crop yields and cropping intensity in the selected 
existing irrigation sites in Bago East, Nay Pyi Taw, Mandalay, and Sagaing regions.

III. Project Description
Component Name
1. Irrigation and Drainage Management
Comments (optional)
The component seeks to enhance more responsive and reliable provision of irrigation and drainage 
services in the project areas to enable an increase in irrigation area coverage, a resulting better farm 
productivity and better distribution of benefits between upstream and downstream users. It will 
initiate institutional change required for the provision of farmer-responsive irrigation services and 
finance the improvement and rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure covering about 
35,000 ha within up to 8 selected schemes in the project regions and will pilot 2-3 small land 
improvement sites in these schemes. The component would support also inclusive land 
administration activities in the selected project irrigation sites.

Component Name
2. Farm Advisory and Technical Services
Comments (optional)
The component seeks to enhance MOAI technology development and farm advisory services at 
target townships which host selected irrigation schemes to improve farmer crop choices and increase 
farm productivity. It will support quality seed production, soil nutrition management, integrated pest 
management, agricultural extension services, and farm mechanization.

Component Name
3. Project Coordination and Management
Comments (optional)


This component seeks to support the project coordination, technical support, communication 
activities, monitoring, and evaluation.

Component Name
4. Contingent Emergency Response
Comments (optional)
This component allows a rapid reallocation of credit proceeds from other components to provide 
emergency recovery and reconstruction support following an eligible crisis or emergency.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 100.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
International Development Association (IDA) 100.00
Total 100.00

V. Implementation
The MOAI will be the implementing agency of the project. The Project will be governed at the 
Union level by the National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) and at the township level by the 
Township Agricultural Coordination Committees (ACC). The project will be managed by the 
Project Management Unit (PMU) which will be integrated within the existing structures of 
Department of Irrigation (ID). The PMU will be located in Nay Pyi Taw in MOAI headquarters. 
PMU would be responsible for day-to-day management and coordination of the project. It will be 
responsible for the project financial management and procurement functions.  It will ensure that 
annual work plans are prepared, budgeted and implemented in a timely manner, and that 
management of project funds is in line with the provisions of the project’s eligibility guidelines. The 
PMU will be responsible for management of the Designated Accounts; disbursement of project 
funds and replenishment of the project bank accounts and preparing and submitting withdrawal 
applications; and consolidation of annual work plans, budget planning, arrange for project annual 
audit, project reporting and M&E.  
 
Implementation of the project activities will be carried out by five technical departments 
(Department of Irrigation/ID, Department of Agriculture/DOA, Department of Agricultural 
Research/DAR, Agricultural Mechanization Department/AMD, and Settlements and Land Records 
Department/SLRD) through their central, regional, district and township level structures. ID will be 
the lead agency for the implementation of the Component 1, with technical inputs from SLRD and 
AMD, and DOA would be the lead agency for Component 2, with technical inputs from DAR and 
AMD. The implementation of filed activities will be done by respective township level staff with the 
supervision and technical backstopping from the team of central/regional/district level Subject 
Matter Specialists (SMS). The implementing departments are responsible for the initiation of the 
procurement activities as per work plan, provision of technical specifications and TORs to PMU and 
serve as members of the evaluation committee; accounting for funds on their respective Operating 
Accounts and at district level accounts and provision of financial information to PMU for the 
compilation of the financial documents; and preparation of the annual work plans of their respective 
sub-components and activities, and provision of information and indicators for the PMU for the 


consolidated project reporting. The ACCs are township level structural coordination bodies, which 
are responsible for the coordination of crop planning and extension activities, and makes irrigation 
water allocation and distribution decisions. The main function of the ACC under the project would 
be to provide a platform for joint (MOAI-farmer) planning and monitoring of project activities in 
targeted irrigation schemes. Implementation of the project activities at the township level will be 
done by the Project Implementation Committees, which is a sub-committee under ACC, and it 
includes township level staff of the implementing MOAI departments.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

Comments (optional)

VII. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Paavo Eliste
Title: Lead Rural Development Special
Tel: 5788+7681 /
Email: peliste@worldbank.org

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Republic of the Union of Myanmar
Contact: U Maung Maung Win
Title: DG, Budget Department, Ministry of Finance
Tel: 9567410450
Email: maungmaungwin58@gmail.com

Implementing Agencies
Name: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
Contact: U Khin Zaw
Title: Deputy Minister
Tel: 9567413778
Email: deputyminister.irrigation@gmail.com




























































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 6

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING

Report No.:  PIDA14019

Project Name NMPRP-2 Additional Financing (P148733)
Parent Project Name Second Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (P113493)
Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country Vietnam
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (80%), Animal production 

(20%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Rural markets (20%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P148733
Parent Project ID P113493
Borrower(s) Government of Vietnam
Implementing Agency Ministry of Planning and Investment
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 19-Nov-2014
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 26-Nov-2014
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

26-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

14-Jan-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
In spite of Vietnam’s impressive achievements in poverty reduction – poverty declined from 58 
percent in 1993 to 14 percent in 2010 according to official statistics, and to 20 percent according to 
GSO-WB – poverty remains high at 60 percent in the West Northern Mountains Region and at 38 
percent in the East Northern Mountains Region (GSO-WB methodology). Limited access to basic 
services, markets, and financial, land, and information resources are the most important constraints 
for the poor in the Northern Mountains. Addressing these constraints is hampered by weaknesses in 
institutional capacity and public sector management: Vietnam has moved from a highly centralized, 
hierarchical, central planning system, to one where many decisions are decentralized. However, 
capacity building at the local level has not kept pace with decentralization. A five-year (national) 
Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP 2011-2015) which responds directly to these 
development challenges was approved by the National Assembly in November, 2011.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context


Poverty is increasingly concentrated among Vietnam’s ethnic minority populations. While ethnic 
minorities account for only 15 percent of the country’s population, they make up for half of the 
poor in Vietnam and have experienced a much slower pace of poverty reduction compared to the 
majority of Vietnam’s population. Poverty among ethnic minorities remains at 66 percent.   Most of 
these ethnic minority groups live in highland or upland areas, in particular in the North-West and 
North-East as well as in the Central Highland regions. The Northern Mountains region has the 
highest rate of poverty and is home to almost one-third of Vietnam’s poor. 
 
Improvements in both the delivery and accessibility of basic public services in the Northern 
Mountains region are especially needed to reach the twin goals of eliminating poverty and fostering 
shared prosperity in Vietnam. Over the last fifteen years, the GoV has launched a number of 
programs through the Ministry of Labor, Invalids, and Social Affairs (MoLISA), the MPI, the 
Committee for Ethnic Minority Affairs (CEMA), the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (MARD) and other line Ministries to address this poverty challenge. Among others, 
these include: (a) the Program for Socio-Economic Development in Communes Facing Extreme 
Hardship in Ethnic Minority and Mountainous Areas (referred to as P135) to finance the commune 
and inter-commune level infrastructures and strengthen planning and implementation capacity; (b) a 
follow-up program (P135-2) designed to reduce poverty among disadvantaged groups; and (c) 
Program 30-A (Support for Fast and Sustainable Poverty Reduction in Poor Districts)  financing the 
development plans for the 62 poorest districts in the country. More recently, the GoV decided to (a) 
continue the series of poverty programs with the newly launched P135-3 under the CEMA; and (b) 
launch a New Rural Area Program (NRAP) under the MARD. In total, Vietnam currently has 16 
different NTPs implemented through various ministries. The consequence of this evolution is a 
degree of institutional fragmentation (and resulting contestation) across major Government 
agencies. 
 
The World Bank has supported Vietnam’s poverty alleviation efforts through two community-
driven development (CDD) operations – the Community Based Rural Infrastructure Project 
(CBRIP) and the Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (NMPRP-1) – which introduced 
participatory approaches and promoted decision making at the commune level; three Development 
Policy Credits (DPCs); and the ongoing CDD operation (NMPRP-2) which focused on 
infrastructure support, livelihood activities, market linkages and further devolution of investment 
ownership to communities. There is evidence that the positive lessons from the Bank’s support are 
being mainstreamed leading to a wider menu of community projects, a stronger focus on 
participatory planning, transparency, devolution of decision making, and institutional capacity 
building at the local level.  
 
In spite of the positive results of various poverty programs, both the GoV and donor agencies are 
concerned about the inefficiencies, administrative requirements and associated costs resulting from 
the high level of fragmentation in Vietnam’s poverty alleviation efforts. Although a clear consensus 
on the consolidation of poverty programs has not yet emerged, various GoV stakeholders at the 
national and provincial levels, as well as donor agencies are taking initiatives to address this 
situation. These efforts focus on (a) the consolidation of existing poverty programs and NTPs in 
possibly two overarching national poverty programs;  and (b) the integration of the planning efforts 
at the local level in one common SEDP.       
 
Alignment with Government Strategy. The NMPRP-2 supports the Government’s Resolution 80/



Page 3 of 6

NQ-CP on Direction of Sustainable Poverty Reduction which aims at accelerating poverty 
reduction in the poorest districts, communes and villages of the country, by setting poverty 
reduction targets of 4 percent per annum over the 2011 – 2020 period (compared to a national target 
of 2 percent) and by prioritizing the mobilization of resources and support to these areas.  
 
The GoV is moving towards medium term planning (3 years planning cycle with a multi-year 
budget allocation rather than annual budgeting as is currently the case). Fully implemented, this will 
give more predictability, flexibility, and discretion to the commune level to plan their investment 
priorities in a more integrated manner. The GoV is also moving towards greater consolidation of its 
various poverty alleviation efforts. The SEDP approach developed under the NMPRP-2 fits very 
well both in this medium-term planning context and in the efforts to integrate various NTPs.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
The development objective for the proposed project is to Enhance the living standards of the project 
beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access to productive infrastructures; (ii) the productive and 
institutional capacity of local governments and communities; and (iii) market linkages and business 
innovations. The key outcome indicators to assess achievement of the PDO are as follows:  
 # At least 60% of the project beneficiaries report satisfaction on the selection, design, and 
implementation of project activities.  
 # The project beneficiaries report an improvement in on- and off- farm income of at least 10% over 
the life of the project.

B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
The AF focuses on institutionalizing and mainstreaming the socio-economic development planning 
approach in the broader planning and budget allocation processes in the project area. The PDO will, 
therefore, be revised to capture this important element of the AF.  
 
Project Development Objective for the AF is revised to read: The Project Development Objective 
(PDO) is to enhance the living standards of the Project Beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access 
to productive infrastructure; (ii) the productive and institutional capacity of local governments and 
communities; (iii) commune integrated investment planning and (iv) market linkages and business 
innovations.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: District Economic Development
Comments (optional)
(about 30% of total allocated provincial project funds, equivalent to US$28.8 million). The objective 
of this component is to provide investment support to the District Socio-Economic Development 
Plans, focusing on productive and economic infrastructure for increased agriculture productivity, 
direct local employment and income generation, and facilitation of business innovation. This 
component supports specific efforts to link the supply side, namely the market and business 
institutions, with the poor.

Component Name
Component 2: Commune Development Budget
Comments (optional)



Page 4 of 6

(about 58% of total allocated provincial project budget, equivalent to US$55.68 million). This 
component will provide block grants to communes to finance small-scale sub-projects at the village 
level for productive infrastructure and livelihood improvement activities that are identified through 
participatory planning processes. Livelihood support will assist the poor with strengthening the 
operations of Common Interest Groups (CIGs), develop necessary skills and the further 
development of market linkages and ensure that women participate in and benefit from the project 
through targeted support to village level women’s groups.

Component Name
Component 3: Capacity Building and Communication
Comments (optional)
(about 6% of the total project provincial allocation budget and CPO’s component, equivalent to US
$6.76million). Under the AF, this component will mostly focus on the farmers and other 
beneficiaries to help sustain their capacity for implementing project activities during the AF period 
and beyond. This component will continue to help improve the capacity of project implementation 
agencies at all levels, especially of the local governments and the communities to plan, manage, 
implement, supervise, and maintain productive infrastructure and livelihood improvement programs, 
communication and information sharing and learning. This component will also support the scaling 
up and institutionalization of the participatory local development planning through the Socio-
Economic Development Plan (SEDP)

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management
Comments (optional)
(about 6% of total allocated provincial project budget and CPO’s component, equivalent to US$8.76 
million). This component is to ensure effective and efficient project management through 
facilitation of various implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), reporting, coordination, 
and quality enhancement efforts.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 110.00 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 10.00
International Development Association (IDA) 100.00
Total 110.00

V. Implementation
MPI will take charge of overall project coordination at the central level, while provinces will be 
responsible for project implementation. At the central level, Central Project Coordination Office 
(CPO) will be established at the Department of Agricultural Economics in the MPI, and facilitate 
overall coordination with provinces, as well as serve as the focal point vis-a-vis the World Bank and 
relevant central government agencies. At each project province, a Provincial Project Management 
Unit (PPMU) will be established at Department of Planning and Investment (DPI). At the district 
level, District Project Management Unit (DPMU) will be created. Community Facilitators (CFs) 
who will provide vital support to the communes in particular in the process of CDBC planning and 



Page 5 of 6

implementation will be competitively selected, and hired under the project as members of DPMU. 
At the commune level, a Commune Development Board (CDB) will be established under Commune 
People’s Committee (CPC) to oversee the implementation of Component 2. Each unit will be staffed 
with appropriate experts as required (see Annex 6 for proposed staffing and key responsibilities).

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Eastern Ukraine: Reconnect, Recover, Revitalize (3R Project) (P172348) 

 
 

  
Apr 01, 2020 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
     

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2020 | Report No: PIDA28762 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Ukraine P172348 Eastern Ukraine: 
Reconnect, Recover, 
Revitalize (3R Project) 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA 10-Apr-2020 30-Jul-2020 Social 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ukravtodor, Ministry for 
Reintegration of 
Temporarily Occupied 
Territories 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
To strengthen transport connectivity, support agricultural sector recovery, and engage conflict-affected communities 
in the design and monitoring of investments in project areas. 

 
Components 

RECONNECT: Roads Investments to Link Rural Communities to Processing, Markets, Services 
RECOVER: Agricultural Investments to Support Sector Recovery and Modernization 
REVITALIZE: Implementation Support Platform 
CERC: Contingent Emergency Response Component 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 



     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 100.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Substantial 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context  

1. Ukraine’s economic growth has been uneven since the country’s independence in 1991 and has been 
impacted by both external factors, such as the global financial crisis of 2008, and the internal conflict that 
began in 2014.  During the 2000-2007 period, Ukraine sustained high annual growth rates of 7 percent on 
average. Capital inflows surged, and credit growth boomed, fueled by the external borrowing of commercial 
banks. This enabled an expansionary fiscal policy that resulted in the accumulation of a structural deficit. Growth 
was almost entirely driven by favorable external conditions, but was not supported by structural reforms. With 
the onset of the global financial crisis, the Ukrainian economy contracted rapidly. During 2008‐2013, growth 
was negative and averaged ‐0.7 percent annually. The Maidan Revolution of 2013/2014, the events in Crimea 
in March 2014, and the armed conflict in the east of the country since 2014 resulted in a continued severe 
recession, and the economy contracted by 16 percent during 2014-2015. The Government of Ukraine (GoU) 
subsequently undertook a series of fiscal and business environment-related reforms that helped stabilize the 
economy. Economic growth has resumed, albeit at a modest rate: gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 2.3 
percent in 2016, 2.5 percent in 2017, 3.3 percent in 2018, and 3.5 percent in the first half of 2019.1 

 
2. Poverty rates vary across the country as fiscal and conflict-related pressures amplify traditional factors 
of vulnerability. Ukraine is characterized by significant regional disparities, and the benefits of past economic 
growth have not been shared evenly. Poverty remains higher in rural areas (8.5 versus 5.1 percent), where local 
communities face challenges such as poor living conditions, outdated infrastructure, and limited public services 
provision. Inflows of internally displaced persons (IDPs) due to the conflict have put an additional strain on local 
resources and services in host communities. Reversing the trend of increasing poverty rates and promoting 
shared prosperity remain significant development challenges that require Ukraine to capitalize on the drivers of 
growth through structural, policy, and investment reforms and the development of human capital. 

 
3. The conflict in Eastern Ukraine has impacted the lives and livelihoods of over five million Ukrainians 
through damage to infrastructure, interruption of markets and services, restrictions of movement, loss of 
employment, and psychosocial impacts. To date, over 13,000 people have been killed and 2.7 million persons 
displaced, including over 1.3 million internally displaced. Despite the extension of the ceasefire agreement in 
February 2015 (Minsk II), the security situation remains volatile, with daily hostilities occurring along the contact 


line separating Government-Controlled Areas (GCAs) and Non-Governmental Controlled areas (NGCAs) in 
Eastern Ukraine. 

  
4. The conflict has severely impacted socioeconomic activity in Ukraine’s eastern industrial heartland of 
Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts. Prior to the conflict, these areas (referred to as “the Donbas”) accounted for 12.5 
percent of Ukraine’s population and generated 15.7 percent of the country’s total GDP and a quarter of its 
exports. Because of the conflict, an estimated 70 percent of enterprises in the Donbas have reported decreased 
investment and revenues, disrupted trade relationships, lack of demand for products, and shrinking 
workforces.2 A World Bank survey of the socioeconomic impacts of the conflict in 2017 highlighted the welfare 
and socioeconomic challenges facing IDPs, veterans, and host communities.3  

 
5. Since taking office in May 2019, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has made outreach and 
development support to Eastern Ukraine a key policy priority, emphasizing socioeconomic integration of the 
region. This policy shift represents a window of opportunity for the World Bank to support the GoU in promoting 
the recovery and development of conflict-affected areas. Luhansk Oblast GCAs are proposed as the geographic 
focus for initial World Bank investment because of their acute lack of connectivity and economic opportunity 
compared to other areas of Eastern Ukraine, to complement and leverage other international partner funding 
more heavily concentrated in Donetsk Oblast, and to promote economic recovery of the region through a focus 
on agricultural development in line with the Bank’s broader support for Ukraine’s land and agricultural sector 
reform agenda as a future engine of economic growth.4  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
6. Economic impacts of the conflict have been among the most acute in Luhansk Oblast. With the division 
into GCAs and NGCAs, the oblast’s rural and agricultural north was severed from its industrialized and more 
urbanized south. Out of a pre-conflict population of 1.5 million people, Luhansk GCAs now have an estimated 
population of 692,000 people. Twenty-two of the region’s 34 cities, including Luhansk City as the oblast regional 
center, are now located in the NGCAs. An estimated 84 percent of the industrial capacity and 81 percent of all 
jobs in Luhansk Oblast have been left outside of the GCAs. Unemployment in the GCAs reached 17.5 percent 
among working age individuals in 2018, the highest of any oblast5 and the region has experienced the sharpest 
decline of any oblast in GDP between 2010-2017. While outmigration from Luhansk Oblast averaged 4,000 to 
6,000 individuals per year during the 2008-2013 pre-conflict period, it has since increased to more than 13,000 
people per year.6   
 
7. Luhansk GCAs also face severe connectivity challenges and lack a quality transport system to serve as 
a backbone of the regional economy. Before 2017, the financial and institutional arrangements in Ukraine’s 
road sector created a large backlog of periodic maintenance and rehabilitation. The shortage of funding, 
combined with a large share of overweight trucks, has resulted in premature deterioration of the network. From 
2011 to 2016, the share of national roads in poor condition (with an International Roughness Index (IRI) > 6) 

increased from 5 to 17 percent. Ukraine is also currently ranked 66th of a total of 160 countries in the World 
Bank’s 2018 Logistics Performance Index 7 and lags behind the best performers in the region and all European 
Union (EU) member states. For Luhansk Oblast, connectivity and logistical challenges are particularly acute. In a 
national comparison, Luhansk Oblast GCAs ranked as having the lowest connectivity level, based on its low 
proportion of roads per square kilometer and the limited access of its cities to major national markets. Major 
upgrading of the regional road network has not been undertaken since the 1980s. Luhansk’s transport system 
has also been severely impacted by the interruption of rail lines and road networks due to the conflict, resulting 
in an increase in overweight trucks transporting products over long distances. The average IRI on the network 
in Luhansk Oblast in 2017 was approximately 6.54, well below the national average.  
 
8. The long-term industrial decline and the recent conflict have increased the prominence of the 
agricultural sector in the Luhansk GCA economy and its importance to rural livelihoods. Before the conflict, 
the share of agriculture in the regional economy was about 10 percent and about 10 percent of the labor force 
was employed in the sector. Today, about 76 percent (or 1.5 million hectares) of the total agricultural land of 
the Donbas is located in the GCAs of Luhansk Oblast, with a growing percentage of workers employed in the 
agricultural sector.8 In the majority of Luhansk GCA districts, agriculture is the leading economic activity and 
sector of employment. In 2018, 23 percent of new jobs created were in agriculture, more than any other sector.9 
As of 2018, a total of 964 agro-industrial enterprises and more than 45,200 private family farms were involved 
in agricultural production.10 These family farms provide significant numbers of informal employment and 
support to rural livelihoods in the region. The sector remains critical because of its role as an employer of last 
resort and its importance for livelihoods for rural populations in the region. Luhansk’s regional development 
strategy highlights agricultural development as a key objective, including increasing productivity and efficiency 
and facilitating processing and access to markets. The project’s focus on agricultural development in Eastern 
Ukraine also aligns with the Bank’s broader support for Ukraine’s land and agricultural reform agenda as a future 
engine of Ukraine’s economic growth and development. Finally, interventions in the agricultural sector, such as 
the introduction of new technologies and the development of value chains, are likely to be more efficient and 
cost effective for recovery than focusing on the restructuring or reconstruction of the former and now 
uncompetitive industrial sector. 
 
9. However, the conflict has resulted in significant negative impacts on agricultural supply and value 
chains in the region. Cereal and oil seed production has remained by far the most important agricultural activity, 
with 57 percent of arable land cultivated with cereals and sunflowers. Prior to the conflict, Luhansk Oblast relied 
on the Luhansk-Valuyki railway and road connections for the transportation of agricultural goods. Commodity 
flows have now been reoriented westward towards the Kharkiv region via longer, poorer quality road 
connections that have increased the required road haulage distance by an average of 65 kilometers. In 2018, 
transport costs for commodities increased by UAH 140-190 per ton of cargo, which impacted profitability and 
income.11 The resulting increased truck traffic has hastened the deterioration of the oblast’s primary and 
secondary road network. In addition, many of the large-scale grain and oil storage, processing, and logistical 

 
7 https://lpi.worldbank.org/international/global.  
8 United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization. 2018. The Agriculture Sector in Eastern Ukraine: Analysis and Recommendations. 
Rome. 
9 United Nations Peacebuilding and Reconstruction Program. 2018. Comprehensive Analysis of the Regional Labor Market and the State 

Employment Service and Their Impact on the Vocational Education System in Luhansk Region. 
10 Luhansk Region Civil-Military Administration. 2016. Regional Development Strategy for the Period Until 2020. Severedonetsk. 

facilities, and most of the food processing industry and modern laboratory testing facilities are now located in 
the NGCAs and are therefore inaccessible. Production costs have also increased because of higher prices for the 
import and transportation of agricultural inputs, such as fuel and lubricants, seeds, and fertilizers.  
 
10.  Subsistence farming is widespread in Luhansk GCAs and is critical in supporting basic livelihoods in 
rural areas but small and household farmers producing vegetables, fruits, dairy products, and meat have lost 
access to aggregators and to the urban markets of Luhansk NGCAs, which accounted for over half of the 
oblast’s pre-conflict population. These producers now also face challenges because of the lack of access and 
investments in on-farm innovation and technology; limited storage, laboratory services, and processing 
facilities; and poor access to finance that would allow them to transition from subsistence level to more market-
oriented production. These challenges are exacerbated by the general uncertainty about the prospects of a 
political settlement and reintegration of NGCA urban markets and trade.  

 
11. Youth, IDPs, and veterans in Luhansk Oblast face particular development challenges. Among the 
average of 13,000 individuals that migrate from the GCAs each year, 67 percent are under 28 years of age, driven 
by limited opportunities for civic engagement, limited prospects for well-paying employment, and concern over 
poor social infrastructure for young families.12 Luhansk Oblast ranks second to Donetsk Oblast in the number of 
IDPs per oblast, with over 270,000 people officially registered. Tensions with host communities are low, 
however, and IDPs are well represented among employees of public service institutions. Yet IDPs face difficulties 
in accessing land, obtaining satisfactory housing, and joining established agricultural networks within the GCAs 
of Luhansk. Most IDPs have skills in engineering, processing, and other mechanical or technical trades that they 
acquired in their home areas, which are now in NGCAs. Veterans in Luhansk Oblast, as elsewhere, have to 
contend with unemployment and difficult transitions to civilian life, lack of psychosocial and rehabilitation 
support, long absences from farming and assets, and difficulty securing their benefit entitlements.13    
 
12. The conflict has exacerbated gender gaps, particularly for rural women. With men being predominantly 
engaged in military operations, women have taken on greater responsibilities for household affairs, with many 
becoming sole caregivers for their families, the elderly, and the disabled.14 Female pensioners, women IDPs, and 
female-headed households with young children are particularly vulnerable to the conflict-induced social 
disruption prevalent throughout Luhansk Oblast.15 Poor road conditions and the resulting longer commutes via 
personal vehicles as well as limited and neglected public transport systems also disproportionately disadvantage 
rural women’s mobility in the region and their access to employment, healthcare, childcare, and other public 
services. Poor mobility also constrains women’s access to more diverse employment opportunities and more 
lucrative markets.16 Many women in rural Luhansk GCAs are engaged in agricultural production at a small-scale 
or household level. However, the supplementary income and food security gained from farming activities is 
limited by poor access to markets, limited productive inputs (both advisory and technological), and lack of access 
to information and skills development around value chain development and value-added production.17 

 
12 SCORE data (2019) for driver identification. See Ukraine State Statistics Agency for outmigration s, 2018-2019. 
13 World Bank. 2017. Ukraine: Socio-Economic Impacts of Internal Displacement and Veteran Return. 
14  Spear, A., Kokanova, N., Magduyk, L., Dadalauri, N., Buzu., and Engvall, L. 2016. Gender analysis of the EU AA/DCFTAs with Georgia, 

Moldova and Ukraine. Swedish International Development Agency Publication. p. 60. 
15  Focus group discussions as part of a WB Rapid Gender Assessment for Luhansk GCAs during project preparation, February 2020. 
16 National official labor force participation rates reflect these realities. Employment among Ukrainian women (47%) is lower than 

among men (63%). UNDP. 2019. Human Development Report. 
17  United Nations Country Team – Gender Theme Group. 2018. Leaving No One Behind: Rural Women and Girls. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
To strengthen transport connectivity and improve agricultural services with the active engagement of conflict-affected 
communities in project areas in Eastern Ukraine. 
 

Key Results 

• Travel time from agricultural communities to service centers/markets in Luhansk GCAs  

• Increased use of agricultural hub and laboratory services (disaggregated by type of 

producer/institution, small-/medium-/large-sized enterprises, women-headed enterprises)  

• Percentage of target beneficiaries of agricultural clusters reporting improved production 

(disaggregated by gender, youth, veterans, production type) 

• Percentage of target beneficiaries who report that the design/operation of infrastructure investments 

financed by the project reflect their inputs (disaggregated by gender) 

 
D. Project Description  
 

13. The project seeks to reinforce national commitment to recovery and development of Eastern Ukraine 
and highlights the benefits of socio-economic connectivity in support of a future settlement.  The project’s 
multi-sectoral investments aim to promote agricultural sector development in rural areas in Luhansk GCAs that 
could help stimulate future growth and opportunity in the region.  Prioritized investments reflect an intensive 
stakeholder dialogue during project preparation with national, regional and local officials, agri-industry, 
agricultural producers, agricultural communities, women, IDPs, veterans, and youth in project areas. 
Recognizing the socio-economic and administrative characteristics of Luhansk GCAs, the project will include the 
following components:  
 
14. Component 1: RECONNECT - Roads Investments to Link Rural Communities to Processing, Markets, and 
Services.  Component 1 will support the rehabilitation of roads in Luhansk Oblast in support of the agricultural 
sector and connecting rural communities to urban service centers in Luhansk GCAs.  Poor and deteriorating local 
roads have been a key bottleneck to agricultural logistics and supply chains and the broader development of the 
region.  Component 1 prioritizes road investments that link farmers to processors, markets, and service centers 
in Luhansk GCAs.  The target road network will be rehabilitated to a category 2-3 standard which is a two-lane 
road with safety specifications including side crash barriers where required.  The project will finance all 
necessary road infrastructure such as bridges, interchanges, and railway crossing, safety measures, site 
supervision of civil works, and equipment.  Additionally, for protection of the investments, the project will 
include installation of weigh-in-motion stations and speed cameras.  The Component will also include activities 
to engage local administration and communities in project areas on road use, road safety measures, and will 
provide technical assistance to support development of ‘feeder roads’ to the network.  This is expected to 
promote local ownership and sustainability of transport investments.  
 
15. Component 2:  RECOVER - Agriculture Investments to Support Sector Recovery and Modernization.  
Component 2 will complement the connectivity investments of Component 1 through select agricultural sub-
projects that address some of the conflict’s impacts on the agricultural sector in Luhansk GCAs, including loss of 
access to agricultural services, processing facilities, product testing and local urban markets, as well as limited 


technology and value chain to market support for the Oblast’s many small producers.  Component investments 
will include: (a) an Agriculture Logistics and Service Hub in Starobilsk City, including a grain/oil seed elevator; a 
small grain/oil seed quality testing facility; an office building for administration and business development 
support; an innovative online trading platform to link producers and traders; and an agricultural services support 
area; (b) a Regional Agricultural Testing and Food Safety Laboratory to address a critical gap following the loss 
of access to the agricultural product testing and food safety management services due to the conflict; and (c) 
Agricultural Cluster Development for small household-level producers.  Community-based Cluster support will 
facilitate the transition from current subsistence production towards more organized and market-oriented 
production practices, including value-chain to market support to an estimated 5 to 10 clusters of 100 to 150 
small household-level producers.  The component will also finance the associated detailed design studies. 
 
16. Component 3 - REVITALIZE: Implementation Support Platform.  Component 3 will support the 
development of an implementation support platform to address management capacity constraints, deficits in 
state-citizen dialogue, and requirements for national-regional-local cooperation to effectively delivery the 
project activities.  Component 3 will finance Project Management activities for the MRTOT.  Component 3 will 
also include the following activities: Luhansk regional public-private investment forums to gather project 
beneficiaries, international and Ukrainian private sector representatives, international and domestic financial 
institutions, GoU representatives, and development partners to raise awareness and promote investment 
opportunities in the region; user/beneficiary surveys and community forums to provide feedback on project 
design and implementation (project processes, budgets and outcomes) for infrastructure investments under 
Components 1 and 2; and a 3R Project beneficiary feedback mechanism (BFM), including Grievance Redress 
Mechanism (GRM).  To educate communities and stakeholders in project areas on the objectives, procedures, 
purpose, and opportunities associated with the project and to emphasize the project as a national investment 
to support economic recovery in Eastern Ukraine, Component 3 will also finance strategic communications 
activities.  The implementation platform supported by Component 3 will promote sustainability and possible 
future scale-up and expansion of Project investments to additional sectors and geographic areas in Eastern 
Ukraine. .

.  
Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 
17. The proposed project is expected to have substantial environmental and social risks. The 
Environmental and Social Risk Classification is based on the potential environmental and social risks associated 
with project activities, as well as project location (proximity to conflict areas) and baseline conditions, overall 
scale of the project, possible cumulative impact and anticipated challenges in environmental and social risk 
management supervision due to limited client capacity. 
 
18. Environmental risks. Although the specific sites where physical works will take place are mostly existing 
roads and urbanized areas, key environmental issues will be related to: (a) waste management of removed road 


surfaces and construction spoils; (b) noise and air pollution with dust; (c) the presence and handling of 
hazardous materials such as bitumen, paint, oil containing materials; (d) the health and safety of the populations 
of the villages and towns along the roads and travelers during road rehabilitation phases, as well as the 
populations living near the agriculture-related investment construction sites; and (e) impacts on water, soil, and 
air quality in case of construction-related spills. These predictable impacts are expected to be temporary, 
reversible, moderate in magnitude, and site-specific. The location of the project near the armed conflict zone 
and in a post-conflict territory raises the risk of unexploded ordnances (UXOs) and some of the locations may 
require demining activities to take place before civil works. Adequate adoption of UXO neutralization 
procedures and occupational health and safety practices for workers during construction and maintenance 
operations will be required. Also, the agricultural logistics and service hub is required to adopt HACCP (Hazard 
Analysis and Critical Control Point) and integrate it into its operational model.  
 
19. Social risks. Social issues and potential risks identified include: one, works to be financed under 
components 1 and 2, and associated ESS5 impacts, particularly under component 1 roads investments; two, 
engagement with local communities and other relevant stakeholders (including with most vulnerable and 
disadvantaged groups) and challenges in ensuring their genuine participation in decision-making processes of 
the project; three, the challenging social environment and baseline conditions in Eastern Ukraine due to conflict; 
and four, limited capacity of Ukravtodor as well as MRTOT in handling ESF requirements.  In addition to these 
risks, the evolving situation around the COVID-19 pandemic may also potentially impact project 
implementation, particularly given public health guidelines on physical distancing and quarantine.  Meaningful 
community engagement will be a challenge in the project areas.  To mitigate this risk, implementing entities 
prepared a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), which among others, suggests preliminary tools (such as 
virtual consultations, etc) to ensure continuous community engagement. Consultation, communication, and 
feedback mechanisms in the design of the project will help to manage expectations, especially for large 
infrastructure projects, and orient investments in ways that address local priorities and strengthen transparency 
in resource allocation decisions.  
 
20. Environmental and Social Framework instruments. Detailed analysis of the application of the World 
Bank’s Environmental and Social Standards (ESSs) has been provided as part of the Environmental and Social 
Review Summary (ESRS). The project applies ESS 1-6, 8, and 10 as relevant at this stage of development and 
needed environmental and social measures will be implemented through the actions agreed in the respective 
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) prepared by UAD and MRTOT and submitted to the World 
Bank. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) with template ESMP, draft SEP, draft RPF 
and Labor Management Procedure were developed and will be updated during project implementation as 
required. Once the project activities are finalized and environmental and social assessments completed, 
additional measures such as subproject-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), Traffic 
Management Plans (TMP) and Waste Management Plans (WMPs) are to be prepared. A project-specific 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be established as outlined in the ESMF. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 
21. Because the project is a multi-sectoral program of support for socio-economic recovery and growth in 
Luhansk Oblast, it requires the involvement of government agencies responsible for recovery/IDPs/veterans, 
transport, agriculture, local infrastructure, and economic development; as well as regional and local officials in 

Luhansk Oblast project areas.  The implementation arrangements will also encourage opportunities for 
interaction and dialogue between national and local levels of administration on project activities.  The Bank team 
agreed specifically on the following: 

 

• UAD will implement Component 1 through its central Project Implementation Unit (PIU) – SOE 
“Ukrdorinvest” (UDI) – and in coordination with the regional UAD office in Luhansk Oblast.  Ukrdorinvest 
has experienced staff with project management, procurement, FM, and social and environmental 
safeguards experience.  Ukrdorinvest will also coordinate with the regional UAD office in Luhansk Oblast 
to support supervision activities and to liaise with local authorities and communities.   
 

• MRTOT will implement Components 2 and 3, drawing on its mandate for conflict-recovery efforts and 
to support establishment of an implementation support platform for national investment in Eastern 
Ukraine.  MRTOT will implement the project through a central PIU and place select PIU staff in the already 
established Sector Office in Luhansk Oblast to carry out coordination, monitoring, communications and 
oversight functions in close coordination with local authorities.   
 

• A Project Steering Sub-Committee will be established under the current Inter-Governmental Council on 
Recovery of the Eastern Regions chaired by MRTOT, or any relevant successor coordination body on 
conflict-recovery.  The Sub-Committee will include participation of relevant national-level agencies, 
including Ministry of Infrastructure, UAD, MDETA, Ministry of Finance, and the Luhansk Oblast State and 
Civil-Military Administration.  The Sub-Committee will be chaired by MRTOT and provide overall strategic 
guidance and oversight to the 3R Project.   
 


























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSA17494

Date Prepared/Updated: 26-Apr-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Sri Lanka Project ID: P156019
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Sri Lanka Agriculture Sector Modernization Project (P156019)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

25-Apr-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Jun-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Agricultural extension and research (20%), Crops (20%), Agro-industry, 
marketing, and trade (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Ge neral agriculture, 
fishing and forestry sector (20%)

Theme(s): Rural markets (20%), Water resource management (20%), Rural policies and 
institutions (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%) , Nutrition and food 
security (20%)

Borrower(s): Ministry of Finance
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry Primary Industries, Provincial Councils of 
Northern, Eastern, North-Central,  Central and Uva Provinces

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.74
International Development Association (IDA) 125.00
Local Communities 0.00
Local Farmer Organizations 44.10
Financing Gap 0.00
Total Project Cost 169.84

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate


Decision Note):
Other Decision: .
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Sri Lanka is a lower-middle-income country of 20.5 million people and a per capita GDP of US$ 
3,811 (2014).  Growth over the past decade has been strong, averaging 6-7% per year.  Absolute 
poverty declined from 22.7 to 6.7% from 2002 to 2012.  Despite this progress, roughly one 
quarter of the Sri Lankans remain nearly poor, as defined by living above the national poverty line 
(about US$ 1.5 but below US$ 2.50 per day (2005 PPP terms).  Sri Lanka has comfortably 
surpassed most of the Millennium Development Goals. Primary school enrollment is near 
universal, while secondary and tertiary enrollment has substantially increased.  Maternal and 
infant mortality rates are at very low levels, and life expectancy at 74 years has been above its 
regional peers for over a decade. 
 
With the end of the civil war in 2009, reconstruction, infrastructure investment, and increased 
consumption have delivered a strong economic peace dividend, driven by the non-tradable sectors 
and public sector investments.  Sri Lanka is also undergoing a structural transformation away 
from agriculture, which now accounts for 10% of GDP towards industry (32.5%) and services 
(57.5%) with associated productivity growth and accelerating urbanization.  However, this 
transformation is progressing relatively slowly with 30% of the labor force remaining in 
agriculture.  Notwithstanding the post-conflict environment, Sri Lanka’s economic policies over 
last ten years have been inward-looking with an increasing degree of protectionism and anti-
export bias.  This has prevented the country from capitalizing on comparative advantage and 
exports; attracting domestic and foreign investments to foster technology transfer; and generating 
new sources of innovation driven growth and employment. 
 
The country’s fiscal landscape is challenging.  In 2014, a widened deficit and a slowdown in 
growth increased the fiscal deficit to 5.7% and the public debt 71.8%, as share of GDP, marking a 
slight reversal of the fiscal consolidation path of the post-conflict period.  The fiscal budget for 
2016 presented to Parliament projected a deficit of 6.0% of GDP for the years 2015 and 2016.  
The government presented its economic policy in November 2015 that includes as priorities the 
generation of one million job opportunities, enhancing income levels, developing the rural 
economy, and creating a wide and a strong middle class.  It proposed fiscal consolidation through 
increasing revenue collection, reforms of state owned enterprises, and enhanced trade and foreign 
investment.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Sri Lanka’s agriculture is characterized by a non-plantation sector and a plantation sector.  Of the 
country’s approximately 2.3 million hectares of agricultural land, 80% are used for non-plantation 
foods crops, comprising rice, maize, fruits, vegetables, and other crops that are primarily grown in 
small-holdings.  About 1.65 million smallholder farmers operate on average less than 2 hectares 
and contribute 80% of the total annual food production.  Commercial crops (minor export crops) 
include cinnamon, pepper, cocoa, and coffee and are grown on small and medium land holdings 

as well.  Plantation crops—coconut, rubber and tea—are cultivated in large estates and small and 
medium land holdings.  Typically, non-plantation crops are grown under irrigated conditions 
while plantation and minor export crops are grown in the rain-fed areas.  Monsoonal rainfall 
patterns shape the agricultural seasons and irrigation patterns.  Two thirds of the agricultural area 
are located in the dry zone where the bulk of the country’s irrigation infrastructure is located. 
 
Sri Lanka’s has successfully attained self-sufficiency in rice and recently also in maize 
production. Rice production has increased steadily from 2.9 million tons (2002) to 4.8 million 
tons in 2015, in part because previously inaccessible land was reopened for cultivation after the 
end of the war but also through introducing high-yielding varieties, expanding irrigation capacity, 
fertilizer subsidies, restrictions on crop choices, and import substitution.  Achieving self-
sufficiency has meant that the production structure has remained concentrated in the low value 
food crops. In 2013, about 45% of the cultivated area was under rice cultivation (up from 37% in 
1980) but the share of rice in the overall value of crop production was only 18%.  Furthermore, 
average rice yields of 4.06 tons/hectare are relatively low and agricultural productivity, as 
measured by total factor productivity, has only grown by an average of 0.6 percent per year since 
1980, lagging behind other South and East Asian countries. 
 
With rice self-sufficiency secured, there is a need to diversify the production structure out of the 
lower value food crops towards high-value agriculture.  Sector policy to date, however, has 
neglected the domestic fruits and vegetable sectors, despite growing domestic demand and 
potential for export growth.  Demand has instead been met by increased imports.  A broad 
recognition has however emerged recently that the modernization of agriculture is needed if 
agriculture is to realize its potential for greater value generation and as a renewed source of rural 
growth for poverty reduction and job creation. Such modernization will require a structural shift 
towards a more high-value oriented agriculture production structure, agro-processing and value 
addition activities, and increased competitiveness.  It will also involve aligning trade policies to 
become more consistent and conducive for high-value export agriculture; realigning and better 
targeting of public sector support, especially fertilizer subsidies; greater attention to R&D; and 
relaxing the rice self-sufficiency policy and allowing for more demand-driven and market 
oriented production.  This will require differentiated strategies for different parts and production 
arrangements across the country.  In the northern and eastern parts of the country, comprising 
primarily the dry zone, there is significant scope for agricultural productivity growth and potential 
for better linkages to domestic and export markets, including value-added production.  In other 
parts of the country, more robust and scaled-up private commercial investment and innovation 
through agri-enterprises and agri-enterprise-farmer partnerships is needed for value addition and 
farmer integration into high value chains through scaling up and diversification into more 
commercial crops.   
 
The proposed project provides a broad framework for Sri Lanka to experiment with innovative 
approaches to address the above mentioned sector issues, overcome the low productivity 
equilibrium, and strengthen agriculture’s contribution to the economy and employment creation.  
The strategic thrust reflected in the project design is to support overall agriculture sector 
development and addressing the longstanding constraints through: (a) developing an incentive 
structure for small, medium, and large enterprises, including farmer producer organizations, to 
invest in commercial agriculture and value chains; (b) promoting partnership arrangements 
between private sector partners and smallholder pro ducers for better linkages; (c) demonstrating 
new agriculture technologies and innovations at sufficient scale to enhance productivity, 

resilience, and diversification in selected prioritized lagging regions; (d) promoting technology 
diffusion through capacity building and training and new models for extension service delivery; 
and (e) supporting sector policy analysis and research for reform.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support increasing agriculture productivity, 
improving market access, and enhancing value addition of smallholder farmers and agribusinesses 
in the project areas.

Key Results 
The achievement of the PDO will be measured using the following results indicators: (a) number 
of direct project beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender; (b) number and share of participating 
farm households adopting improved technology packages and production practices supported 
under the project; (c) number and share of project-supported farmer producer organizations and 
farmer – agribusiness partnerships making a profit; (d) percentage increase in average value of 
sales of agriculture products due to project interventions; and (e) the number of new jobs created 
through small and medium enterprise investments under the project.

D.  Project Description

The project comprises four components, as follows: 
 
Component 1: Agriculture Value Chain Development (Total US$102.7 million; IDA US$58.6 
million). The component would promote commercial and export-oriented agriculture through 
attracting and leveraging investments from farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses for 
high value agriculture production and value addition. Component 1 comprises the following sub-
components: 
 
Sub-component 1.1: Investment Preparation Support, supporting: a training program on principles 
and procedures of the Matching Grants Program under sub-component 2; public advertisements 
and information workshops at national, provincial and district levels for prospective grant 
applicants; support to the project’s Technical Review Group and Board; international advisory 
support to operationalize the Matching Grants Program; staffing support and equipment and 
operation cost for the Matching Grants Secretariat and three regional support offices; technical 
assistance support to assist applicants in the preparation of quality investment proposals; and 
technical assistance support to support the environmental and social safeguards requirements 
within the Matching Grants Program. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Matching Grants to Producer Organizations and Agribusinesses, supporting a 
Matching Grants Program to support investments from farmer producer organizations and 
agribusinesses in agriculture. Matching Grants would be provided under two windows.  Matching 
Grants of US$5,000 up to US$75,000 would be provided for investments to be developed and 
implemented by farmer producer organizations.  Eligibility criteria for farmer producer 
organizations to participate in the program would include: formal registration; appointment of an 
accountant; a cash contribution of 10 percent of the total investment; and availability of 
commercial financing of 40 percent of the total investment.  Matching Grants of US$75,000 up to 
US$500,000 would be provided to agribusiness for agriculture value chain investments. 


Applications for grant support would be evaluated on criteria, such as outreach and capacity 
building to smallholder farmers, including women headed producer groups; focus on lagging 
regions; as well as technical quality, innovation, business rationale and others. 
 
Sub-component 1.3: Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG), supporting a PCG to share financial risk 
with participating financial institutions that have expressed interest in lending to beneficiaries of 
the Matching Grant Program.  The PCG would be administered by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka 
(CBSL) and operate on the basis of the World Bank Group Principles on Partial Credit Guarantee 
Schemes, published in December 2014, covering the governance, management, administration, 
sustainability, and monitoring of PCG. 
 
Component 2: Productivity Enhancement and Diversification Demonstrations (US$ 58.63 million, 
IDA US$ 58.63 million).  The component would support smallholder farmers to produce 
competitive and marketable commodities, improve their ability to respond to market 
requirements, and move towards increased commercialization.  Component 2 comprises three 
sub-components: 
 
Sub-component 2.1:  Farmer Training and Capacity Building, supporting knowledge building and 
capability improvements of smallholder farmers and the establishment of farmer organizations to 
help them to respond better to market opportunities.  Individual farmer capacity building and 
farmer producer organization training will be implemented through training programs reaching 
out to approximately 600 villages and approximately 500 farmer producers groups.  The trained 
and established farmer producer organizations would become eligible for participation in the 
Matching Grants Program under Component 1. 
 
Sub-component 2.2:  Modern Agriculture Technology Parks, supporting the introduction, 
demonstration, and scale-up of innovative agriculture technology packages to support 
productivity improvements, diversification, commercialization, more sustainable and climate 
resilient production patterns.  The sub-component would support 7 agriculture technology 
demonstration parks in the selected districts of Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura (Northern 
Province), Batticaloa, (Eastern Province), Matale (North-Central Province), Moneragala (Uva 
Province), and Polonnaruwa (Central Province) which have been identified based on high poverty 
headcounts and agriculture potential.  The agriculture parks would be established to demonstrate 
entire value chain approaches, involving farmer mobilization and training, production, post-
harvest handling and/or processing, and marketing. 
 
Sub-component 2.3: Up-grading Production and Marketing Infrastructure, supporting: (i) the up-
grading and rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks in 
selected areas and linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks; (ii) the improvement 
of existing production and market access roads and construction of new field access tracks to 
improve transportation, access to markets and accessibility for agricultural machinery; and (iii) 
village level storage and product handling facilities, including drying platforms and sheds, 
composting facilities of crop residues, storage facilities and others. Infrastructure investment 
would focus on public infrastructure and would be linked to gaps identified under the technology 
parks development (sub-component 2.2). 
 
Sub-component 2.4:  Analytical and Policy Advisory Support, supporting the CPCU, MOPI and 
MOA in addressing knowledge gaps; developing an evidence-based policy, legal and regulatory 
framework; and formulating sector and sub-sectoral strategies to provide an enabling environment 
for a sustainable and competitive modern agriculture and food system.  The component would 
provide support to evaluate policies and regulations and recommend adjustments, reforms or new 
policies to promote competitiveness, responsiveness to market demand, sustainability, and 
resilience; undertake market analyses for new exports, and analyze policy, regulatory and 
institutional constraints, and identify public investments to address these constraints; and evaluate 
the social and economic impact of policies and public expenditures and make recommendations to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditures.  The sub-component would also 
provide some technical support the MOA, including the design of a National Agriculture 
Information System and others. 
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Total Cost US$ 7.74 million, US
$ 7.7 million IDA).  The component would support the PMOs at MOPI and MOA at the central, 
provincial and district levels in project management and coordination, technical supervision, 
financial management, procurement, social and environmental safeguards, and monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E).

Component Name
Agriculture Value Chain Development
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Productivity Enhancement and Diversification Demonstrations
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project is national in scope and designed as framework approach.  Specific project locations 
and their characteristics are not yet known and would be identified during implementation as part 
of the project’s demand-driven Matching Grants Program approach. Itis expected that project sites 
would be located in all three major agro-ecological zones, including the wet zone (average annual 
rainfall above 2500 mm); the intermediate zone (annual rainfall between 1750-2500 mm); and the 
dry zone (annual rainfall less than 1750 mm).  The dry and intermediate zones cover about 66% 
of the agriculture land area and receive about 30% of the country’s annual surface water yield.  
They are extensively used for agriculture and require irrigation water to be productive.  The bulk 
of the country’s irrigation infrastructure is hence located in the dry zone.   The wet zone, on the 
other hand, comprises 34% of the agricultural land area and receives 70% of the country’s annual 
surface water yield.  The three major plantation crops, most other export crops and various types 
of fruits are grown here under rain-fed conditions. 
 
The project’s proposed agriculture technology demonstrations parks included under Component 2 
and the complementing production infrastructure investments will be located in the 7 priority 
districts of Jaffna, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura, Batticaloa, Matale, Polonnaruwa, and Moneragala.  
While exact project sites are not yet known and will be determined as part of a detailed feasibility 
study process during implementation, the districts are located in the dry zone (except for 
Moneragala, which is located in the intermediate zone) and have been identified based on high 
poverty rates and high absolute numbers of poor.  The majority of these districts are located in the 
former conflict affected areas and are characterized by poor or dilapidated public infrastructure, 
lack of productive infrastructure at the farm level, and poor access to markets, as well as limited 
livelihood and employment opportunities.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Mohamed Ghani Razaak (GSU06)

Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (GEN06)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
Institutional responsibilities and arrangements for project implementation will be established, as 
follows: 
 
A Central Project Coordination Unit (CPCU) will be set up in the Ministry of National Policies and 
Economic Affairs with representation from other government stakeholders.  The CPCU has the 
mandate to ensure effective coordination and communication between the Ministry of National 
Policies and Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Central Bank, Ministry of Primary Industries, 
Ministry of Agriculture, and Provincial Councils; provide overall policy guidance and support to the 
implementing ministries; mobilize and ensure coordination with public and private sector 
stakeholders; and oversee the project’s regular internal auditing/ third party-monitoring of the two 
main investment components to ensure adherence to project principles and transparency. 
 
Ministry of Primary Industries (MOPI).  MOPI will be responsible for implementing Component 1, 
sub-components 1.1 and 1.2, and will oversee the following project-relevant units and entities: 
 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) in MOPI is responsible for the management of Component 1, 
sub-components 1.1 and 1.2, including annual work and budget planning, coordination of the 
Department of Export Agriculture in Kandy and the three regional offices (Kilinochchi, Ampara, 
Matara); coordination with the three Provincial Councils and Provincial Ministries of Agriculture; 
procurement; fund withdrawal and financial reporting; technical and institutional aspects of 
implementation; general oversight, field supervision and acceptance checks; and training and 
capacity building, and the periodic progress reporting to the Bank.  A separate Secretariat would be 
set up in the PMU of MOPI to manage the day-to-day implementation of the matching grants 
program. 
 
A Board of Directors will be set up to oversee and govern the application process and approval of 
matching grants under sub-component 1.2.  The Board will be chaired by the Secretary of MOPI and 
include representatives from MOF, Board of Investment, Ceylon Export Board, Central Bank, 
Chamber of Commerce, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Fisheries and the Provincial Councils 

and Provincial Ministries of Agriculture.  The Board would be responsible for reviewing and 
approving applications for matching grants that have passed the technical, institutional and business 
reviews, ensuring that proposals are in accordance with government policy directions and objectives, 
especially outreach and integration of farmers and female entrepreneurs; make good business sense; 
and are in compliance with project regulations, including safeguards. 
 
A Technical Review Group (TRG) will be appointed, comprising representatives from government 
technical departments, academia/ research, industry-related enterprises, and other stakeholders.  The 
TRG would provide guidance to farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses that have 
expressed interest in applying to the matching grants program on technical and business-related 
aspects of investment proposals, such as crop/ product selection, technology innovation, production 
organization and processing, marketing research, partnership arrangements, investment costing, and 
other elements of investment planning process.  The TRG would review finalized investment plans 
for farmer producer organizations and agribusinesses for technical and economic soundness and 
compliance with project regulations and recommend such proposals for approval to the Board.  
 
The Regional Development Department of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka would be responsible for 
administering the Partial Credit Guarantee (PCG) under Component 1, sub-components 1.3.  The 
Department would also maintain the PCG Operational Manual, develop a business plan and pricing 
model, continuously review the eligibility criteria for loans, establish a registration system for loans 
to be covered under the PCG, and manage the claims processing system under the project. 
 
Under the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)  the following project-relevant units and entities would be 
set up or would be set up for the management of Component 2.  
 
A Coordinating Committee will be set up in MOA to be responsible for the regular coordination 
between MOA and the Provincial Councils of the participating provinces, based on the principles of 
the Wadduwa Declaration of the National and Provincial Ministers of Agriculture, signed on 
September 30, 2015. The Coordinating Committee would ensure that project’s sub-components 2.2 
(Agriculture Technology Demonstration Parks) and 2.3 (Upgrading Production and Marketing 
Infrastructure) are fully coordinated with the Provincial Councils based on the devolved provincial 
mandates for agriculture and rural development 
 
A Project Management Unit (PMU) in MOA will be responsible for overall day-to-day coordination 
and management of Component 2 in coordination with the five Provincial Councils and Provincial 
Ministries of Agriculture.  The PMU would be responsible for annual work and budget planning; 
coordination with provinces/ districts in public outreach and community mobilization, procurement 
and contract management, fund withdrawal and financial management, including and financial 
reporting; technical and institutional implementation aspects, field supervision and acceptance 
checks; and training and capacity building.  It would also be responsible for reporting on project 
progress and implementation issues to the Bank, including the relevant project M&E indicators and 
safeguards implementation performance. 
 
The Sri Lanka Council for Agriculture Research Policy (CARP) under MOA, would be responsible 
for implementation of sub-component 2.4. Day to day activities under the component will be 
managed by a small Policy Analysis Unit, housed in CARP with project support and reporting to the 
Chairman of CARP.  The primary responsibility of the Unit would be to support policy level 
discussions of the CPCU, Ministry Finance, MOPI and MOA; monitor consistency of economic 


policies across various parts of the government; develop an annual program of studies and analytical 
work, and monitor implementation during the year through periodic activity progress updates.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes To mitigate potential environmental and social 
impacts that may be caused due to physical project 
interventions and ensure all negative impacts 
associated with project investments are avoided and/
or mitigated, an Environmental Assessment and 
Management Framework (EAMF) and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared.  These will provide detailed guidance on 
the specific due diligence requirements as well as on 
the specific environmental and social safeguards 
instruments required for sub-projects, including 
screening, environmental management plans, 
resettlement action plans etc.) to mitigate any 
potential negative project impacts.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The project will support agriculture activities on 
existing farmland.  Expansion of farmland into 
fragile habitats is not foreseen. The project will 
improve agricultural practices and is expected to 
reduce the pressure on farmland and surrounding 
natural habitats.  Some activities might impact 
natural habitats because of their proximity to such 
habitats (construction and/or upgrading of rural 
infrastructure).  The EAMF prescribes a due 
diligence mechanism under OP 4.01 to ensure 
impacts are mitigated.  Preventive and mitigation 
measures will be included in sub-project EMPs, as 
needed.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No Project-supported agricultural activities will take 
place on existing agricultural areas and there will be 
no expansion into forest areas.  No activities in 
commercial forests or in close proximity to forest 
areas are expected.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project promotes Integrated Pest Management as 
a key thematic area,  however, the intensification and 
diversification of agriculture could to lead to changes 
in the application of pesticides for pest and disease 
control.  A Pest Management Plans (PMP) has been 
prepared based on Integrated Pest Management 
(IPM) principles, describing the national regulatory 
framework, current status of pest and disease control, 
monitoring and supervision mechanism, major 


experience and problems, and lessons learned from 
past projects.  It specifies a range of actions to 
strengthen integrated pest management practices and 
awareness and includes capacity building and 
monitoring program to facilitate implementation.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No No project-support activities are expected in the 
vicinity of or to affect physical cultural resources, as 
defined by OP/BP4.11. Measures on safeguard 
chance finds are  included as part of mitigation 
measures defined in EAMF OP/BP 4.01.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

No No conclusive evidence or data exist yet on the 
possible presence of indigenous peoples 
communities in the country.  In general, "forest 
dwellers" who live in remote locations and close to 
commercial forests and national forest reserves are 
considered native communities.  Their livelihood is 
dependent on forest resources.  Project supported 
agricultural activities will take place on existing 
agricultural areas and there will be no expansion into 
forest areas.  No activities in commercial forests or in 
close proximity to forest areas are expected and 
therefore forest dweller communities will not be 
affected through proposed investments under the 
project.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The project will not involve involuntary resettlement 
or physical displacement.  Small-scale land 
alignment or acquisition for village-level civil works 
may be necessary.  Where the need for land 
acquisition may arise, the project’s RPF will apply.  
The RPF provides the guidelines and procedures for 
land acquisition; describes provisions for 
compensation and mitigation measures, includes a 
grievance redress mechanism, and set up safeguards 
monitoring and institutional arrangements in the 
event of land acquisition and livelihood losses.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes The project may include the up-grading and 
rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation facilities   and 
water tanks.  OP/BP4.37 applies because of the 
dependence on water conveyance and control via 
irrigation systems and the links of smaller tanks with 
the storage and operation of upstream medium/ large 
dams, which is typical for Sri Lanka’s cascading tank 
and irrigation infrastructure.  The rehabilitation of 
small irrigation schemes and tanks will not include 
dams and embankments more than 15 meters high 
and will not include medium to large scale dams.  

The EAMF includes generic dam safety measures to 
be adopted in the design and implementation of 
rehabilitation/ improvement of irrigation structures.  
It also includes guidance on the preparation of 
operation and maintenance (O&M) plans and dam 
safety plans in accordance with OP/BP4.37.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The proposed project activities do not have any 
impacts to the international waterways and therefore 
this policy is not triggered.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No There are no disputed areas where project 
interventions are undertaken and therefore this policy 
is not triggered.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to bring positive environmental benefits to the project areas through the 
introduction and expansion of modern technology applications that help improve current cropping 
patterns and farming methods, increase efficiency in the management of water resources, protect 
agriculture soils, and roll out integrated pest management. However, two components under the 
project may involve activities that could have significant environmental impacts if not mitigated 
properly, especially during the construction phase.   Component 1 will support commercial 
agriculture and agro-products processing. Component 2 would finance the establishment of 
agriculture technology demonstration parks and improvements of rural infrastructure, including 
access roads and tracks, rehabilitation of small irrigation schemes, land preparation, market 
facilities, and others. The project’s process-oriented and demand-driven framework approach does 
not allow to determine project investments and specific project locations for investments under 
these components at appraisal. However it is known that these will be conducted in existing 
agricultural areas. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Matching Grants to Producer Organizations and Agribusinesses:  
 
The agricultural sector faces a number of challenges in managing land productivity which often 
results in encroachment of forest areas for search of new land for cultivation. Soil erosion, crop 
disease management, water use efficiency, water pollution from excessive use of chemicals, and 
cultivation of unsuitable crop varieties are among the key areas where focus in terms of 
environmental management are a priority.   
 
Supporting the commercial agriculture and agro-products processing will require that stringent 
environmental screening, identification of potential environmental and impacts and management 
in terms of set up and operations of the activity. Among other best practices would be organic 
cultivation and at the same time careful soil management needs to be taken care of to prevent soil 
erosion and top soil degradation.  As specific sites and nature of the agro-business activities are 
not yet known, best practices that need to be employed and general recommendations cannot be 
employed as the nature of the activity varies and depend upon the soil type, area of cultivation ,i.e. 
dry zone or wet zone, and topography, crop type and the specific agriculture sector.  A site-


specific Environmental Management Planning approach plays a key role and has been 
incorporated in to the Matching Grants Program.  In addition, via strengthening technical 
knowledge and extension services focusing on the careful and minimal use of chemical fertilizer 
and pesticides/herbicides through good practices such as Integrated Pest Management and 
Integrated Plant Nutrition Management via the project’s Pest Management Plan, activities that 
facilitate sustainable agricultural development should be essentially promoted. 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Establishment of Modern Agriculture Technology Parks: The sub-component 
would support 7 agriculture technology demonstration parks in selected districts in the Northern, 
Eastern, Central, North-Central and Uva Provinces, which have been identified based on high 
poverty headcounts and agriculture potential. The exact location of where these interventions will 
be taking places will only be deduced during the project implementation stage. Environmental 
screening will be an essential part of the site selection process in order to ensure project-supported 
agriculture-related activities would take place on existing farmland and no expansion or creation 
of new farmland into fragile habitats is foreseen. The project will bring improvements to 
agricultural practices that are expected to reduce the pressure on these areas and the likelihood of 
encroachment into sensitive natural habitats. 
 
Sub-component 2.3: Up-grading Production and Marketing Infrastructure:  This component will 
entail physical interventions under the following purview; (i) the up-grading and rehabilitation of 
small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks and irrigation systems in selected 
priority areas, linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks; (ii) the improvement of 
existing production and market access roads and construction of new field access tracks to 
improve transportation, access to markets and accessibility for agricultural machinery; and (iii) 
village level storage and product handling facilities, including drying platforms and sheds, 
composting facilities of crop residues, storage facilities and others. Infrastructure investment 
would focus on public infrastructure and would be linked to gaps identified under the technology 
parks development.  Impacts to physical and ecological environments during the construction 
phase of physical interventions outlined under Sub-component will be predominantly during the 
construction phase and consist of impacts such as the stress of natural resources such as sand, 
water and spil, removal of productive topsoil, solid waste generation in the form of construction 
waste, localized dust and noise and safety and occupational health to laborers. These impacts will 
be management via mitigation measures that will be implements via sub-project specific 
environmental management plans. 
 
The project is expected to generate positive social benefits and provide sustainable poverty 
reduction opportunities into lagging rural areas. Improved agriculture productivity and value chain 
development are expected to create additional economic returns for farmer households.  Expected 
benefits include employment opportunities for poorer households, individual and collective 
empowerment through membership in formal farmer producer organizations and in partnership 
arrangements with agribusinesses, improved access to finance, technology, and markets, as well as 
technical and management skills. Attention to more equitable sharing of economic gains from 
investments in commercial agriculture modernized value chains will be paid during the process of 
farmer producer organization establishment. Investments in local infrastructure will have positive 
impacts if infrastructure is targeted to serve both agricultural production needs and the needs of 
local communities.  A mandatory social screening is specified in the Operations Manual and RPF 
and will allow for the detailed assessment of potential social impacts and risks and relevant 
mitigation measures of all sub-projects.  Land acquisition is expected to be small-scale and to be 
manageable through the RPF and Resettlement Action Plans.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
No potential indirect negative environmental or social impacts are expected under the project.  It is 
worthwhile to note that women producer organizations will receive priority in the matching grant 
facility and other project-supported activities. However, a number of issues deserve attention and 
monitoring from a social development perspective during implementation:  Women-headed and 
poor households may be especially vulnerable and their participation in project activities might be 
limited resulting in inequitable production arrangements within farmer producer organizations or 
in partnership arrangements with agribusinesses. Market risks will remain substantial, and timely 
access to market information will remain challenging.  This may result in producer organizations 
not being able to assess market and demand conditions adequately.   Modern agriculture requires 
more investment while some of the proposed commodities may provide returns only with some 
time lags.  Poorer households may therefore face increased risk of indebtedness because of their 
motivation to participate in the project.  Producer arrangements will require the organization and 
streamlining of large numbers of smallholder producers under unified production and land 
management arrangements, requiring special attention to ensuring voluntary and fully informed 
participation.  Complex land tenure and land ownership patterns in Sri Lanka’s smallholder 
agriculture might hinder the introduction of modern agriculture practices and new technologies.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
Alternative design consideration included a three pronged approach that included major 
investment components on climate smart agriculture, value chain development for higher value 
agricultural products, and on reforms to the country’s research and development and extension 
systems.   This scope was considered to broad and complex, including from an environmental and 
social safeguards perspective and the project design was simplified as described above.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) in lieu of an overall project-
specific Environmental Assessment (EA) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared as details of specific sites and related activities and interventions are not yet available. 
The EAMF primarily includes an assessment of generic issues that are typically associated with 
anticipated interventions under the project, measures for environmental risk mitigation and 
institutional arrangements for conducting environmental assessment, instruction to the preparation 
of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), implementation and monitoring. The RPF provides 
guidance on the land acquisition process and  the preparation of site-specific Resettlement Action 
Plans where needed. 
 
To ensure that project interventions supported under the Matching Grant Program are 
environmentally sound, the EAMF includes environmental screening and evaluation criteria which 
will be part of the screening process for matching grant applications under Component 1.   MOPI 
will be responsible for ensuring the environmental screening of all project concept notes and full 
proposals submitted by applicants to the matching grant program.  The environmental screening 
process and evaluation criteria presented in the EAMF are reflected in the Operational Manuel of 
the Matching Grant Program as well and built in to the eligibility assessment criteria of matching 
grant applications.  
 
All interventions (excepting those that obviously are environmentally benign or low impact) under 

Component 2 will be subject to an environmental screening with the objective to: (a) determine the 
anticipated environmental impacts, risks and opportunities of sub-project; and (ii) determine if the 
anticipated impacts and public concern warrant further environmental analysis, and if so to 
recommend the appropriate type and extent of Environmental Assessment needed as per the set 
criteria in the EAMF.   
 
The EAMF is taking the applicable safeguard policies into account as well as the national 
environmental requirements and will serve as a guide to the level of environmental analysis and 
mitigation required for all interventions supported by the project which will have the potential to 
trigger negative environmental impacts and thereby ensure compliance with the World Bank’s 
environmental safeguard policies and the relevant national Environmental regulations during 
implementation. As a category B project, all physical activities financed under the project in 
general will be required to prepare an EMP and follow the World Banks Environmental Health 
and Safety Guidelines and agriculture sector guidelines as defined in the EAMF. 
 
Interventions under Component 2, sub-component 2.3 may include the rehabilitation and up-
grading of small-scale irrigation infrastructure and existing water tanks (managed by the Agrarian 
Services Departments) linked to the agriculture technology demonstrations parks under sub-
component 2.2.  OP/BP4.37 applies because of the dependence on water conveyance and control 
via the irrigation systems and the links of smaller tanks with the water storage and operation of 
upstream medium/large dams, which is typical for Sri Lanka’s historical cascading tank and 
irrigation infrastructure.  There is an ongoing and effective dam safety program in Sri Lanka 
targeting all large to medium scale dams (upstream of small irrigation structures) and smaller 
dams along cascading irrigation systems.  Full-level inspections, dam safety assessments, and 
safety remedial measures have already been conducted and details are documented by the 
Government satisfactorily to the Bank and in compliance with the provisions of OP/BP4.37 on 
Dam Safety.   
 
Typical interventions under this project would include repairs and improvements, such as 
protection of downstream slopes of dam embankments, providing toe-filters and toe drains to 
improve downstream drainage and arresting excessive seepage flows, upstream slope protection 
strengthening of the structural stability of  spillways and sluice structures etc.  The anticipated 
project activities will result in an overall enhancement of the safety of dams (tank bunds) against 
the risk of failure.  The project, however, will not finance construction of new tanks (new dams/
tank bunds).  Small dams i ncluded under the project would be less than 5 meters in height. 
 
All irrigation infrastructure related interventions will require a screening, as per the EAMF to 
verify whether upstream medium to large scale dams are present and connected hydrologically, 
and to assess their dam safety status and, if needed outline follow-up actions.  If the presence of 
upstream and hydrologically connected dams is confirmed and these have not been rehabilitated or 
strengthened and thus have Dam Safety implications, the following will be conducted: an 
inspection and evaluation of the safety status of the dam, its appurtenances, and its performance 
history; and a review and evaluation of the mandated dam owners operation and maintenance 
procedures.  A report will be provided on the findings of the review, including recommendations 
for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dam to an 
acceptable standard of safety.  Necessary additional dam safety measures or remedial work may be 
financed under the project. When substantial remedial work is needed, these will be undertaken 
using the following procedures: a competent professional will be recruited to design and supervise 
the work.  Because the size of dams would be less than 5 meters in height, qualified professionals 


will be hired by MOA to design and supervise the work. 
 
The MOA and MOPI have limited prior experience with Bank-funded projects respectively and 
the capacity to manage environmental and social safeguards in project implementation is limited 
as well.  MOPI is a new entity.  MOA has been long established, however, does not partake in the 
implementation of national level environmental regulations and institutional capacity is weak.  
MOA has however sufficient capacity and technical expertise in pest management because MOA 
is implementing national programs in pest control and pesticide management.  To address capacity 
weaknesses, the PMUs under MOA and MOPI will both recruit full-time qualified environmental 
and social specialists prior to the commencement of field implementation to be responsible for the 
implementation of the project’s environmental and social regulations, including the EAMF, PMP, 
EMPs, and RPF and RAPs.  In addition, the project will provide training in environmental 
management and on environmental and social management to improve institutional capacity. The 
cost for monitoring and supervising the implementation of environmental and social project 
regulations have been integrated into the overall project investment cost.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations with direct and indirect project beneficiaries, government stakeholders at various 
administrative levels and farmers will be conducted as part of the participatory process for 
designing and implementing sub-projects.  Consultation will aim at: sharing information, listening 
to feedback, engaging citizens in decision making, and involving stakeholders in participation in 
the implementation process.  Consultations will also enable the project team to hold joint 
discussions with the beneficiary communities, share ideas about planning and implementation, and 
benefit from local knowledge to take more informed decisions. Consultation will take place inform 
of public meetings, focus group discussions, sub-project specific community consultations as part 
of the social screening process and direct one-to-one consultations.  A Public Information Booklet 
will be used as an information dissemination technique to promote competition and innovation in 
technology development and advocate for poor framer groups, including women farmer groups, to 
take part in project activities.  Following review by the Bank, the safeguards instruments including 
RAPs, EMPs have been disclosed through the Infoshop and locally on the ministries’ websites, 
and through the PMUs and at Divisional Secretariats of project areas. 
 
The project will adopt following as citizen engagement mechanisms: (a) continuous community 
consultations as social preparation and screening of  subprojects; (b) social audit committees at 
local level to monitor subproject implementation; and (c) third party monitoring of project 
implementation to ensure projects benefits are distributed  equally and efficiently across different 
social groups and geographical regions.  The outcome of the citizen engagement exercises will be 
documented and reviewed during implementation support missions.


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Climate-smart Irrigated Agriculture Project (P163742) 

 
 

  
Mar 13, 2018 Page 1 of 20  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Sep-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA23484 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Sri Lanka P163742 Climate Smart Irrigated 
Agriculture Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 28-Aug-2018 08-Nov-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture  

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the productivity and climate resilience of smallholder agriculture in 
selected hotspot areas. 

 
Components 

Agriculture Production and Marketing 
Water for Agriculture 
Project Management 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 140.00 

Total Financing 140.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 125.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 125.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 



     Counterpart Funding 15.00 

          Borrowing Agency 10.00 

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 5.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
A. Introduction and Context 
 
1. Sri Lanka is a Lower Middle-Income country with a GDP per capita of USD 4,073 (2017) and a total population 
of 21.4 million people. Following 30 years of civil war that ended in 2009, Sri Lanka’s economy grew at an average 5.8 
percent during the period of 2010-2017, reflecting a peace dividend and a determined policy thrust towards 
reconstruction and growth; although there were some signs of a slowdown in the last few years. The economy is 
transitioning from a predominantly rural-based economy towards a more urbanized economy oriented around 
manufacturing and services.  Economic growth has contributed to the decline in the national poverty headcount ratio 
from 15.3 percent in 2006/07 to 4.1 percent in 2016. Extreme poverty is rare and concentrated in some geographical 
pockets. 
 
2. The Government that came to power in 2015 envisions promoting a globally competitive, export-led 
economy with an emphasis on inclusion. It has indicated keenness to undertake reforms in the areas of public finance, 
competitiveness, governance, and education sectors. In 2017, the Government presented Vision 2025, a policy 
document that both identified economic limitations due to the constrained fiscal space and presented structural 
reforms (including the promotion of private sector participation) to address key economic challenges and strengthen 
economic growth. Despite Sri Lanka’s remarkable economic achievements, many people continue to be at risk of falling 
back into poverty. 
 
3. Sri Lanka is vulnerable to climate-related natural disasters that have major economic impacts. Long-term, 
annual losses for housing, infrastructure, agriculture, and relief from natural disasters are estimated at LKR 50 billion 
(USD 327 million), with the highest annual expected losses from floods, cyclones or high winds, droughts and landslides. 
This is equivalent to 0.4 percent of GDP or 2.1 percent of GoSL expenditures. Due to the increased sophistication of the 
economy the damage caused by the 2016 and 2017 floods and landslides was more than twice as high in US$ terms 
than the worst flood disasters between 1992 and 2011. 
 

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

4. The agriculture sector remains the backbone of Sri Lanka’s culture and economy.  The agriculture sector 
contributes 7.7 percent to GDP and still employs approximately 27 percent of the population.  Of the country’s 
approximately 2.3 million hectares of agricultural land, around 80 percent is under smallholder production, with 
around 1.65 million smallholder farmers operating on average less than 2 hectares.  Sri Lanka has successfully attained 


self-sufficiency in rice through policy interventions including fertilizer subsidies. However, expenditures on vital public 
services, such as Research and Development (R&D) and extension services account for only three percent of total 
agriculture expenditure and much of this limited budget is spent on rice research. The focus on self-sufficiency in rice 
has limited farmer’s opportunities to diversify into higher value products and kept the sector concentrated in the low 
value food crops.  As a result, agriculture productivity, as measured by Total Factor Productivity (TFP), has only grown 
by an average of 0.6 percent per year since 1980 and Sri Lanka lags significantly behind other South and East Asian 
countries. Women contribute to over 38 percent of the farming operations in Sri Lanka. However, the unemployment 
rates of women are more than double that of men at all age levels, with more than 60 percent of women engaged in 
agriculture working as unpaid family labor. Furthermore, only 10 percent of female farmers receive extension services 
in comparison to 90 percent of male farmers.  
 
5. Irrigation is a key feature of the smallholder agriculture sector.  Sri Lanka has a long history of water 
management for agriculture production.  The expansion of crop cultivation into the dry zones of the north, east and 
south-east of the country was enabled through the construction of elaborate water management systems, dating back 
to the period between 500 BC and 300 AD. The systems are based on water capture in small reservoirs commonly 
known as “tanks” connected via canals into “cascades” which enabled crop cultivation throughout the country 
including those areas with long and variable dry seasons. Tank cascades remain the primary source of water for dry 
season cultivation of approximately 74,150 hectares, supporting the livelihoods of approximately 154,744 farmers.  
Recently, water scarcity has increased because of high inter-annual and inter-seasonal variability in rainfall, catchment 
area land-use changes which have reduced the proportion of rainfall available for capture in downstream tanks, and 
the growing demand for water to meet the needs of a growing population.  For example, drought in 2016 and 2017 
affected 1,927,069 people across 17 districts, according to the Disaster Management Centre. During the Maha season 
in 2016, 612,224 hectares of paddy were cultivated of which 50,615 hectares were damaged due to the drought, with 
total production of MT 2.383 million, 30 percent of the average in last ten years. 
 
6. Hotspot areas are the most vulnerable to climatic events .  Although much of the country has been subject 
to the increased frequency and severity of climate e vents, some areas have emerged as being particularly 
susceptible to either flood or drought events, or both.  These are areas which are predominantly agriculture based 
and therefore the livelihoods of smallholder farmers are at risk.  Hotspots have been identified through a rigorous, 
analysis of empirical evidence by the Department of Agrarian Development (DAD) of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), 
the World Food Program (WFP) and the International Water Management Institute (IWMI). 
 
7. The management of irrigation water suffers from institutional fragmentation and lack of local accountability. 
The management of irrigation tanks has undergone a transformation in the post-independence period. Community 
institutions which originally managed these tanks were initially replaced with a new GoSL-led institutional system that 
ultimately became ineffective. To overcome the top-down management of tank systems, since 1978 there have been 
experiments in Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM), involving local communities in the management of irrigation 
schemes. PIM was approved as official policy in 1992 and Farmer Organizations (FOs) were created by the Agrarian 
Services Act of 1991 to manage minor tanks. Despite this policy direction, less capacity of FOs to manage limited 
remaining water and lack of strong oversight from GoSL have compounded the situation. Within GoSL, the responsibility 
for the management of these tanks currently lies with three different institutions: Ministry of Irrigation, Water Resource 
and Disaster Management (MIWRDM); Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) and, Provincial Councils (PCs). The responsibility 
for system maintenance budgeting and implementation is shared across these institutions and FOs often with unclear 
mandates. Water user fees were removed after the independence, and GoSL started to allocate maintenance budgets 
which are insufficient to meet maintenance needs. But, FOs collect contribution from farmers and they are 
maintaining their own Operation and Maintenance (O&M) funds. 




 
8. While many of these tanks are still functioning, some are in a completely dilapidated condition and the 
overall performance is low.  Past tank rehabilitation efforts have largely failed to produce the desired results for many 
reasons. Firstly, insufficient attention has been paid to water and land use management in the upstream catchment 
areas. The supply of water from upstream catchment areas is in most cases decreasing because of land use changes, 
including deforestation and infrastructure development, which has also increased the flow of silt into the supply canals 
and tanks resulting in declined water inflows into the tanks and reduced water storage capacity in the tanks. Secondly, 
previous rehabilitation efforts have not adequately accounted for the hydraulic inter-connectedness of tanks within 
cascades resulting in sub-optimal development of water resources and negative downstream impacts. Finally, past 
rehabilitation efforts have not sufficiently factored in either growing water demand in the tank command areas or the 
likely future impacts of climate change, such that rehabilitated tanks have failed to provide enough water supply to 
meet even current demand. 
 

9. Improved access to irrigation and better water management needs to be addressed in conjunction with 
improving productivity in the sector.  Agriculture productivity is low due to an inhibiting policy framework, weak public 
services and low levels of private investment.  With rice self-sufficiency secured, a consensus has recently emerged 
within the GoSL that the country should take a more strategic approach to addressing low productivity by (i) 
modernizing water resource infrastructure, minimizing flood damages and managing water allocation more efficiently 
and (ii) diversifying the agricultural sector away from relatively low value food crops towards high value and export-
oriented commodities. In the water sector, an integrated basin approach to water investment and management needs 
to be built on integrated basin plans developed through effective stakeholder participation. As a middle-income country 
in an economically strong region, farmers can capitalize on growing domestic consumer demand for diversified, 
nutritious, and higher-valued foods and take advantage of the country’s proximity to fast growing neighboring markets. 
The GoSL has recently implemented measures to improve the competitiveness of the agriculture sector, such as 
promoting commercial and export-oriented agriculture through attracting and leveraging investments from farmer 
producer organizations and agribusinesses for high value agriculture production and value addition under the Bank-
supported Agriculture Sector Modernization Project.  
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD) 
  
10. The Project Development Objective is to improve the productivity and climate resilience of smallholder 
agriculture in selected hotspot areas. 

 
Key Results 

11. The key results indicators to assess project outcomes are: 

• KPI 1: Increase in water productivity at farm level (Custom); 

• KPI 2: Increase in agriculture productivity of crops (Custom); 

• KPI 3: Crop diversification index (Custom); and 

• KPI 4: Direct project beneficiaries, segregated by gender (CRI). 
 

D. Project Description 
  
12. Theory of Change: The project will address the key problem of the vulnerability of agriculture systems in 



climatic hotspot areas of the country.  The drivers of this vulnerability are (i) lack of farmer access to reliable 
sources of irrigation water, (ii) insufficient protection of agriculture land from floods; (iii) low levels of 
diversification in agriculture production; and (iv) limited adoption of climate-smart technologies. Addressing 
these issues will involve an approach that (i) addresses expected long-term trends in climate change including 
the frequency and severity of climatic events (flood and drought); (ii) adopts a catchment scale approach to water 
management; and (iii) integrates agriculture and water by working with farmers and Farmer Organizations (FOs) 
to improve the sustainable management of water and soil resources, and promote the adoption of suitable on-
farm water management and crop production technologies. 
 
13. The proposed project interventions will introduce catchment level hydrological assessments that 
incorporate future climate change projections to assess water availability and identify appropriate investments 
for upper catchment area treatments, water harvesting, rehabilitation of irrigation systems and reduced flood 
damage. Once water availability is assessed in a river basin, watersheds, sub-watersheds, cascades and individual 
tanks, then technical designs will be carried out for the tank irrigation systems, which consist of watershed 
catchment area, tank headworks, canal system and agriculture production area. The water stored in rehabilitated 
tanks will be used to commence CSA activities. Management of irrigation schemes will be enhanced through 
improved capacity of FOs. The project would support the identification, demonstration and adoption of 
technologies to both improve water use efficiency and enable farmers to diversify their production and move 
into higher value crops. Finally, support would be provided to enable farmers to have improved market access. 
Through these interventions, as stated below, the core project objectives of improving climate resilience and 
increased productivity would be achieved. 
 

 
 
 
14. Project Beneficiaries: The primary project beneficiaries will be over 470,000 smallholder farmers in 
hotspot areas (375,000 ha) in eleven administrative districts (Kilinochchi, Mullaitivu, Anuradhapura, 
Polonnaruwa, Puttalam, Kurunegala, Trincomalee, Batticaloa, Ampara, Hambantota and Moneragala) spread 
across six provinces (Northern, North Central, North Western, Eastern, Southern and Uva) in the dry zone of Sri 


Lanka (see Project Area in Annex 9). Smallholder farmers consist of small farmers (1.0 to 2.0 ha of farm land) and 
marginal farmers (less than 1.0 ha).  They will gain knowledge and technology transfer and access to 
infrastructure assets to enhance climate resilience in farming resulting in increased revenue from crop 
diversification and participation in emerging value chains.  Many technical and managerial staff of the 
participating agencies will benefit through training and capacity building activities. The project will also promote 
participation of youth and women in all key project interventions to ensure that they would benefit from the 
project activities. 

 
15. Hot-Spot Area Development Model: Given the centrality of tanks in the agrarian livelihoods of the dry 
zone of Sri Lanka, their current levels of neglect and the increasing vulnerability of these areas to both droughts 
and floods in quick succession with consequent impacts on agricultural production and incomes, the 
rehabilitation of tank-based irrigated agricultural systems is key to improving the resilience of these areas and 
the agrarian communities that depend on them. Resilience being ‘the ability of a system to bounce back or return 
to normal functioning after adversity’,1 the Hot-Spot Area Development model aims to enhance the resilience of 
these areas and those who depend on them for their livelihoods. Climate shocks add to relatively low paddy 
productivity. Resilience will be built through stable and rising incomes of agrarian families living in these hotspot 
areas despite increasing climatic variability. The expected results of this novel model will be achieved by (1) 
flexible and adaptive management of existing and improved irrigation water storage and delivery structures to 
make irrigation more reliable in the face of rising climatic variability (including more frequent episodes of high 
intensity rainfall and flooding and/or drought); (2) better agricultural inputs, techniques and practices that will 
help farmers maximize water use efficiency given rising climatic variability – and reduce crop harvest losses; and 
(3) better access to new markets and higher prices, through marketing higher up the value chain, more 
competitive agri-enterprises and upgraded infrastructure for agricultural trade to stabilize and increase incomes 
from agricultural livelihoods. The project will prioritize nutrient-rich foods to improve year-round nutrition. 
 

16. Phasing: In view of the complexity and innovativeness of the project and to learn lessons, the project will 
be implemented in three overlapping stages. The first stage (2018–2021) will cover three Hot-Spot Areas 
(Anuradhapura, Kurunegala and Kilinochchi districts), whereas the second (2020–2023) and third (2021–2024) 
stages will cover the balance eight districts. Progress will be reviewed annually and prior to completion of every 
stage, to sanction the next stage of implementation. All project financed activities in a stage will be completed in 
3 years but the O&M activities will continue till end of the project.  

 

Project Components 

 
17. Component 1: Agriculture Production and Marketing (US$ 42 million). The objective of this component 
is to improve agriculture productivity and diversification through the adoption of CSA practices and improved 
on-farm water management. 
 
18. Component 2: Water for Agriculture (US$ 92 million). The objective of this component is to facilitate (a) 
planning for water and other infrastructure necessary to support climate-resilient irrigated agriculture, (b) 

 
construction of the planned infrastructure; and (c) co-management of this infrastructure by central/provincial 
governments and the local community. 
 
19. Component 3: Project Management (US$ 6 million). The objective of this component is to ensure the 
quality of overall project management, while ensuring smooth coordination of activity implementation by various 
agencies and strategic partners at national and subnational levels. This component will finance (i) the consultancy 
and operating costs of the PMU and DPD Offices and of different project executing agencies, including for 
fiduciary and safeguard aspects; (ii) the monitoring and evaluation of project activities at baseline, midterm and 
end of project, including geotagging of the assets created; and (iii) information, education and communication 
campaigns to make all stakeholders aware of the project. 

 
20. Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (US$ 0.0 million). This emergency response component 
will allow for rapid reallocation of project proceeds in the event of a natural or man-made disaster or crisis that 
has caused or is likely to imminently cause a major adverse economic and/or social impact. 

 

21. Climate Co-Benefits: The project seeks to derive Climate Co-Benefits (about 95 percent) through: (i) 
enhanced water security at farm level through the rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation systems and 
improvement in water efficiency; (ii) improved soil health through the adoption of good agricultural practices to 
improve soil fertility, soil nutrient management, and promote soil carbon sequestration; and (iii) improved 
adaptation to climate risks through increased farm productivity and crop diversification. 

 

22. Project Cost and Financing: The project will be financed through a six-year Investment Project 
Financing (IPF) loan. The total project cost is US$140 million and will be funded by an IBRD loan of US$125 million, 
with the GoSL contribution of US$ 10 million to cover salary costs on parallel basis and the Beneficiaries 
contributing US$ 5 million in kind.  Retroactive financing up to an aggregate amount of US$ 5 million will be 
available for eligible expenditures incurred under all project components and all categories prior to the date of 
signed Loan Agreement, but on or after July 01, 2018. 
 
E. Implementation 
 
23. The key design features incorporated in the institutional and implementation model include: multi-
stakeholder approach - different stakeholders involved in the field of climate resilient irrigation and agriculture 
are expected to contribute to project implementation from national to sub-national levels; coordinated 
approach - stakeholders are expected to share knowledge and resources in a collaborative manner at each level; 
citizen engagement - local smallholder farmers, medium sized agribusiness owners, common interest groups, 
producer organizations, individual entrepreneurs and their customers will be involved in the planning & 
implementation of project activities, along with government counterparts, NGOs, academia and the private 
sector; consistency with the National Poverty Alleviation Programme – since the project will also work with the 
People’s Company of the Grama Shakthi Programme implemented at Grama Niladhari Division (GND) level; Use 
of existing government staff – except a few of the full-time key professionals to be recruited from the open 
market, the rest of the staff will be from existing government cadres and work on a part-time basis at both 
national and provincial levels; and gender equality - the project design and approach will take into account the 
gender dimension and ensure that the project provides equal opportunities for women to participate in the 
project cycle. 

 

24. Institutional arrangements:  The project is fully integrated in the GOSL administration, and the 
implementation is designed to capitalize on existing government agencies at national, provincial, district, 
divisional, and   Grama Niladhari Division levels. A Project Management Unit (PMU) will be established under 
the Ministry of Agriculture, whereas Deputy Project Director’s Offices (DPD Offices) will be established under 
the Ministries of Irrigation & Water Resources Management and of Provincial Councils and Local Government. 
At provincial level, there will be Provincial DPD Offices set up in each of the participating Provinces to implement 
the project. The Provincial DPD Offices will be set up under the Chief Secretaries in Kilinochchi, Kurunegala, 
Anuradhapura, Trincomalee, Hambantota and Moneragala Districts, and they will cover the district level 
activities of the respective districts. In addition, a District Unit of the DPD Office will be established under the 
District Secretary at the Office of the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Development in Puttalam, Batticaloa, 
Mullaitivu, Polonnaruwa and Ampara Districts to coordinate all agencies operating at district level.  
 

25. There will be a Project Appraisal Team (PAT) set up at district level, and it will be coordinated by the 
District Planning Director. The PAT is an independent body and will report to the DPD. In addition, at the district 
level, there will be an advisory committee headed by the District Secretary. The Divisional secretaries of the 
participating divisions and district and divisional level heads of the government agencies, representatives of 
chamber of commerce, Associations of Farmer/Producer Organizations and NGOs will participate in the Advisory 
Committee. The Advisory Committee will guide the project implementers at the district level to implement CSIAP 
effectively. 

 
26. At Divisional level, there will be a Divisional Unit of the Provincial DPD Office set up at the Agrarian 
Service Center (ASC), and it will be headed by the Divisional Officer of the ASC. The Divisional Unit will function 
as a supporting unit to the Provincial DPD office and work closely with the District Unit to implement the Project 
effectively. The community based organizations, such as Farmer Organizations (FOs), Producer Groups (PGs), and 
Grama Shakthi People’s Company (GSPCs) operating at the Grama Niladhari Division (GND) level are the 
institutions that will be actively involved in the project together with the beneficiary farmers at the community 
level. Given the transformative nature of the project, institutional coordination across the relevant sectors is 
emerging as a critical task for the PMU in developing an effective project implementation mechanism to achieve 
convergence with other programs. The institutional arrangement is further described in Annex 2 of the PAD. 
 
27. Implementation arrangements:  Overall project implementation is the responsibility of the Ministry of 
Agriculture (MOA). Since the institutional capacity of MOA is limited and special skills are required to implement 
the complex project activities, the project will draw expertise from the Ministry of Irrigation, Water Resource 
and Disaster Management (MIWRDM), Department of Agriculture (DOA), Department of Agrarian Development 
(DAD) and Irrigation Department (ID), as well, and acquire outside expertise, including consulting services. The 
day-to-day management and operation of the project is the responsibility of the Project Management Unit 
(PMU), headed by a Project Director (PD) appointed by MOA and assisted by national level Deputy Project 
Director’s offices in MIWRDM and MSPCLG as well as provincial level Deputy Project Director’s offices. The 
project will give attention to institutional coordination across departments, agencies, and strategic partners 
involved in the implementation of project activities. Specifically, as the MoA has an existing PMU under the 
ASMP, core functions such procurement, FM and safeguards would maximize the use of existing capacity.  Overall 
project oversight is the responsibility of the National Project Steering Committee (NPSC), established in the 
Ministry of National Policies and Economic Affairs (MNPEA) and chaired by its Secretary. The main responsibility 
of the NPSC is to provide strategic guidance for the implementation of the project and to act as the interface 
between the central and provincial institutions. The NPSC also approves the annual work program and budget 
for the project, endorses the working arrangements with strategic partners, and is briefed by the Bank (and the 


PD) on the outcomes of implementation support and review missions carried out with the Bank team at least 
biannually. 

 
28. The PMU is responsible for ensuring that: (i) all project activities are planned, financed and 

implemented as per the project annual work program and budget, (ii) project implementation is in line with 
operational guidelines of the Project Implementation Plan (PIP), (iii) project procurement and financial 
management activities are carried out in timely manner as per the World Bank’s Procurement for IPF Borrowers 
(2016), the project fiduciary manuals and the procurement plan, and (iv) social and environmental safeguards 
applicable to the project are fully complied with. The PMU is also responsible for monitoring project activities, 
preparing the quarterly and annual project progress reports, and ensuring that all reports (including financial 
reports) are submitted to the World Bank in timely manner.  

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The proposed project will be implemented in 11 districts in the dry zone climate vulnerability hot spots, 
covering at least 5 major watersheds. The mean annual rainfall is under 900mm (much of it being received 
during the northeast monsoon season from November to January) and mean annual temperature ranges 
between 28°C to 32°C. Droughts that persist for more than three months are common. It has a climax 
vegetation of dry evergreen forest and moist deciduous forest, with forests giving way to a stunted, 
shrubby, drought-tolerant vegetation in its driest parts. The forests found in most parts are secondary 
vegetation, which developed after hundreds of years of repeated clearing and cultivation. The natural 
vegetation has adapted to the annual change from flood to drought. The forests have been largely cleared 
for agriculture, timber or grazing, and many of the dry evergreen forests have been significantly degraded. 
Several protected areas have been established to protect some of remaining natural forests. Agriculture, 
settlements and other development activities have fragmented most of the forests giving rise to human-
wildlife conflicts, particularly with elephants. Overall, about 30% of Sri Lanka’s labor force is engaged in 
agriculture, and in the dry zone that has been the frontier for irrigation based development, directly or 
indirectly connecting entire population to agriculture. However, most farm households have multiple 
livelihood strategies as income from one source is insufficient for living. The predominant form of 
settlement in the project area is ‘village’ organized around a tank that is part of a cascade system. Although 
many of these small tank based villages have been incorporated into large and medium scale irrigated 
agricultural development schemes managed by the government, a substantial number of tank-villages that 
are rain-fed, persists. Most settlers in the project area have been granted land ownership and smallholdings 
predominate, and sub-division and fragmentation is common in tandem with the occurrence of large 
operational holdings – all devoted to food crop cultivation. Irrigation communities in the dry zone are 
connected with the government system of administration and management, including for irrigation 
management. Additionally, highland agriculture and illegal slash and burn agriculture also can be observed 
alongside small-scale inland fishery activities which take place in man-made tanks. 


G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Darshani De Silva, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Bandita Sijapati, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

In order to mitigate potential environmental and 
social impacts that may be caused due to physical 
interventions and to ensure all negative impacts 
associated with project investments are avoided 
and/or mitigated, appropriate environmental and 
social management measures will be guided by the 
EAMF. The EAMF provides detailed analysis of the 
scale of due diligence required (such as 
environmental assessments, environmental 
management plans, etc.) for potential activities 
under the project. Additionally, a RPF has been 
prepared to identify and mitigate land-related social 
impacts under the Project. A ToR for the proposed 
Strategic Environmental Social Assessment (SESA) 
has also been included in the EAMF. SESA will inform 
the mini-watershed planning process to ensure 
broader watershed-level impacts are integrated into 
the planning process. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
There will not be any financing of private sector 
entities under this project and therefore this policy is 
not applicable for this project. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

OP4.04 applies to all types of natural habitats 
including natural forests. There is the possibility of 
impacting catchment forests due to dam 
rehabilitation activities. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

Project-supported agricultural activities will take 
place on existing agricultural areas and there will be 
no expansion into forest areas. No activities on 
commercial forestry is supported by the project. 
However, dam improvement work may impact some 
of the catchment forests.  There will be watershed 
protection activities, which would have positive 
impact on forests. These impacts will be managed 



through the safeguard instruments that will be 
developed under OP 4.01 and OP 4.37. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Because of the standardization, intensification and 
diversification of agricultural activities under the 
project, changes in the application of pesticides for 
pest and disease control are foreseen. It is not clear 
at this point, if the project would finance the 
procurement of pesticides. A Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) that has been prepared under the Agriculture 
Modernization Project building on Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) principles has been adopted by 
this project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

As of now, no project activities are expected in the 
vicinity of or affect physical cultural resources (PCR), 
as defined by OP 4.11.  There are also no new 
construction of irrigation infrastructure planned. 
Mitigation measures if any activity takes place closer 
to PCRs and measures on PCR chance finds will be 
included as part of the mitigation measures defined 
in EAMF under the OP 4.01. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
There is no conclusive evidence/information 
available that establishes the presence of indigenous 
people in the project area. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will support civil works and other 
activities associated with construction, rehabilitation 
and reconstruction of small-scale market 
infrastructure, tank systems, water harvesting 
structures, irrigation schemes, etc. At present, these 
activities are envisaged to take place on existing 
canals and schemes or land belonging to individual 
farmers, and the need for taking private land under 
the project is not expected. However, there may be 
need for additional land, albeit minimal, for 
catchment area treatment, reestablishment of canal 
reservations, and rehabilitation/reconstruction of 
irrigation schemes. Further, there may be 
encroachers or others using the land necessary for 
the civil works thus requiring adequate mitigation 
measures to be put in place during project 
implementation.  Accordingly, a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) has been prepared in accordance 
with OP/BP 4.12. Further, to support the mini-
watershed planning process, a ToR for the proposed 
Strategic Environmental Social Assessment (SESA) 
has also been included in the EAMF. 


Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The project plans to improve and rehabilitate small 
dams and the EAMF will include the process to be 
adopted on safety of dams including required 
expertise under the OP/BP 4.01. irrigation schemes 
to be reconstructed/rehabilitated would entail 
minor works to improve existing capacity of the 
tanks to ensure the cascade system functions 
efficiently. The Dam Safety and Water Resources 
Management Project financed by the World Bank  
has already rehabilitated most of the larger tanks 
and their respective dams and has also set up dam 
safety panel to monitor the interventions and 
operations. They will continue to provide guidance 
to the decisions that will be taken on this project.  All 
the requirements applicable to the project will be 
identified early during the implementation stage so 
that all the necessary plans and organization set-up 
are completed on time. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The proposed project activities do not have any 
impacts to the international waterways and 
therefore this policy is not triggered. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
There are no disputed areas where project 
interventions are undertaken and therefore this 
policy is not triggered. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project area covers hot spot areas spanning Ampara, Batticaloa, Trincomalee, Kilinochchi, Mullaitivu, 
Anuradhapura, Polonnaruwa, Puttalam, Kurunegala, Hambantota and Moneragala Districts in Eastern, Northern, 
North Central, North Western, and Uva Provinces. The first stage of the Project (2018-2021) will cover three Hot Spot 
Areas, whereas the second stage of the project (2020-2022) and third (2022-2024) will cover the balance eight 
districts. However, the exact locations for the specific interventions under the Project have not been identified, and 
the selection of activities will be determined only during implementation.  
 
The project is classified as an Environmental Category B.  It is expected to bring positive environmental and social 
benefits to the project areas through the scale-up of climate-resilient agricultural technologies and farming practices 
that help improve soil health, water-use efficiency and crop products, catchment area treatment to promote more 
efficient use of surface water and more sustainable use of groundwater for agriculture and development of waterbody 
capacity of climate hotspots, and overall improvement in the productivity of small-holder farmers. Components 1 and 
2 may involve physical activities that could have adverse environmental and social impacts if these aspects are not 

 

fully integrated into hot-spot area development plans and negative environmental and social risks are not identified 
and mitigated properly. Likewise, some activities supported under the project, such as small scale market 
infrastructure, construction and rehabilitation of irrigation canals, water storage facilities, etc.,  are likely to cause 
social risks and impacts, including land acquisition, impacts on livelihoods, loss of assets, etc. Although the project 
activities will be confined to rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and support to existing farmlands, some of the 
project districts consists of known physical cultural resources that can be impacted during works carried out under the 
Project. 
 
The promotion of climate smart agriculture systems and related value chains under the project could also lead to 
changes in the application of pesticides for pest and disease control. At present, project-supported climate-smart 
agricultural activities are envisaged to take place on existing farmland, and no expansion or creation of new 
agriculture systems into fragile habitats is foreseen. Likewise, the project will bring improvements to watershed 
protection and promote agricultural practices that are expected to reduce pressure on natural habitats and the 
likelihood of encroachment into sensitive ecosystems. However, some activities may negatively impact natural 
habitats because of the proximity of project activities, such as the construction or upgrading of rural infrastructure. 
The project plans to undertake catchment treatment as part of village-level watershed plans to make them more 
climate resilient and, which may bring positive impacts on natural forests in the upper catchment areas due to 
additional protection measures. Such areas that require additional protection related activities are expected to be 
identified through SESAs.  
 
Some negative impacts to forests are expected during tank rehabilitation work and while the project will primarily 
support the increase in the storage capacity of tanks through removal of excess sedimentation and establishment of 
mechanisms to reduce future sedimentation, some inundation of forests may still be possible, particularly in those 
areas where small tanks have been abandoned and natural forest regeneration has taken place on the tank bed.  
 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Based on the available information, no potential indirect negative environmental or social impacts are expected under 
the project.The project interventions will spread across 11 hotspot areas where the nature/scope of future activities is 
presently not known. Regardless, the SESA proposed to be carried out during implementation for each hotspot will 
help in identifying any indirect and/or long-term impacts of future activities and mitigating such impacts as part of 
project interventions. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Alternatives to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts can be considered only during implementation once the 
project area and the specific activities are known. In principle however, the EAMF and the RPF include measures that 
need to be adopted in order to avoid or minimize adverse impacts. For instance, a 'negative list' has been prepared 
under the EAMF which among others indicates types of sub-projects that will not be financed under the project (e.g., 
activities that involve significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats, activities that would increase 
human-wildlife conflict, construction of large new infrastructure within or directly adjacent (in buffer zones) to 
protected areas, etc). Likewise, to avoid impacts of land acquisition, the RPF indicates that to the extent possible, sub-
project activities will be carried out in the existing footprint of the infrastructure facility, utilize public land or land that 
is voluntarily donated, and only in exceptional basis will there be acquisition of private land under the Project. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 


capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF) has been prepared to guide the screening of 
activities for physical investments, technical assistance, project supported-advisory, and policy support interventions 
and resulting implementation from an environmental perspective and mitigation actions to manage their 
environmental impacts. The EAMF defines the screening and decision-making process based on the screening, the 
content, procedures and responsibilities for the preparation and implementation of individual sub-project 
Environmental Assessments (EAs) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) to address site-specific risks and 
impacts and subsequent monitoring and reporting requirements. The EAMF also includes sectoral environmental 
management guidelines for the subsectors of agricultural processing, which will be applicable under the matching 
grant program. To ensure impacts to natural habitats are mitigated, the EAMF prescribes proper due diligence 
mechanisms, including relevant preventive and mitigation measures to protect local ecosystems and habitats to be 
included in the respective sub-project EMPs with special attention given to ensure risks and impacts due to human-
elephant conflict are mitigated where such conflicts exist and using successful co-existence models that already have 
been demonstrated within the country. In order to ensure negative impacts to forests are minimized, the EAMF 
includes screening criteria and relevant mitigation measures. In addition, a separate Pest Management Plan (PMP) 
prepared under the Agriculture Modernization Project developed based on Integrated Pest Management (IPM) 
principles has been adopted by this project.  
 
Likewise, the RPF sets out principles and guidelines to identify and assess the potential social impacts and risks, 
prepare mitigation plans as part of sub-project preparation, institutional arrangements and processes to be followed 
for the Project. This includes: (i) principles and procedures for screening and assessing impacts; (ii) the criterion and 
due diligence processes based on risks, including the provisions for entitlements and eligibility criteria; (iii) guidelines 
for preparing time-bound action plans to ensure compliance with WB's OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and 
national regulations relating to land acquisition; (iv) institutional arrangements for implementing resettlement action 
plans; (v) guidance for public consultation process and disclosure of safeguard documents; (vi) mechanisms for 
grievance redress, monitoring and evaluation of process and outcomes; and (vii) responsibilities of the GoSL and WB in 
relation to the preparation, implementation and progress review of social safeguards documents for the various CSIAP 
sub-projects.  
 
In addition to the EAMF and the RPF, as part of hot-spot area development, Strategic Environmental and Social 
Assessments (SESAs) will be undertaken to be integrated into the village-level plans. All irrigation infrastructure 
related interventions require a screening to be included in the SESA to verify whether upstream medium to large scale 
dams are present and connected hydrologically and to assess their dam safety status and, if needed, outline follow-up 
actions. If the presence of upstream and hydrologically connected dams is confirmed and these have not been 
rehabilitated or strengthened and have dam safety implications, the project will undertake an inspection and 
evaluation of the safety of the dam, its appurtenances, and its performance history, and a review and evaluation of 
the mandated dam owner’s operation and maintenance procedures. A report will be provided on the review’s 
findings, including recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the 
existing dam to an acceptable standard of safety.  Necessary dam safety measures or remedial work will be financed 
under the project. When substantial remedial work is needed, these will be undertaken, including recruitment of a 
competent professional to design and supervise the work, and the Dam Safety Panels established under the 
Department of Irrigation and Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka will provide the guidance and continuous due diligence 
as necessary. As part of SESAs, physical cultural resources will be documented, and the EAMF includes screening 
criteria to ensure sub-projects will not produce any negative impacts to such resources. The EAMF also includes 
procedures to be adopted during a chance find.  
 


In terms of capacity, the Ministry of Agriculture has recently been exposed to world Bank-financed Project while the 
Irrigation Department has two ongoing operations supported by the Bank. In addition, some of the provincial councils 
(e.g., Northern and Eastern) have been involved in World Bank financed operations. However, a comprehensive 
capacity building program for implementation of safeguards instruments prepared under the Project as well as the 
social and environmental management within the sector, will be prepared during implementation. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary key stakeholders are smallholder farmers, producer organizations, productive alliances, agribusiness 
entrepreneurs, implementing organizations, government departments/units, including technical and managerial staff 
of participating agencies. The project will actively promote youth and women in all key project interventions to ensure 
that they are fully engaged in and also benefit from all project activities.  
 
During the preparation of the safeguards instruments, consultations were held on 18 June 2018 in Anuradhapura and 
on 21 June 2018 in Colombo, and feedback received during these consultations have been included as part of project 
design and minutes of the consultations with details of the participants, have been included as part the RPF. 
Additionally, the EAMF and the RPF also include consultation strategy which among others emphasizes that all 
stakeholders will be consulted in a culturally appropriate manner while preparing site-specific safeguards instruments 
as well as during implementation. The process of consultation will be documented and account taken of the results of 
consultatoins, including any agreed actions resulting from the consultation. The RPF and the EAMF also requires that 
all the social and environmental assessment documentation and site specific safeguards action plans (e.g., EMP, SIMP, 
RAP) will be made available to the public by the PMU through the project website and notices through media (as 
relevant), prior to start of civil works, and or tending of works contract. The EAMF and the RPF have also been 
disclosed in-country as well as through World Bank's external website. 
 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)

Additional Financing
.

Report No.: PIDISDSA16272
Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data
Country: Pakistan Project ID: P157736

Parent Project ID (if 
any):

P125999

Project Name: Additional Financing for Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Productivity 
Program Phase-1 (P157736)

Parent Project Name: PK Punjab Irrig Agri Productivity Improvement Prog Phase-I 
(P125999)

Region: SOUTH ASIA

Estimated Appraisal Date: 18-Jan-2017 Estimated Board Date: 23-Mar-2017

Practice Area (Lead): Agriculture Lending Instrument: Investment Project 
Financing

Borrower(s) Islamic Republic of Pakistan
Implementing Agency Directorate General Agriculture (Water Management)
Financing (in USD Million)

    Financing Source Amount

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 130.00

Local Farmer Organizations 70.00

Financing Gap 0.00

Total Project Cost 200.00

Environmental Category: B-Partial Assessment

Appraisal Review Decision 
(from Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:

Is this a Repeater project? Yes
.

.

B. Introduction and Context
Country Context

Pakistan posted the GDP growth of 4.2 percent in FY2014/15, below the 5.1 percent target. Private 
investments as share of GDP declined to 9.7 percent, but overall deficit remained 5.3 percent of GDP, 
0.3 percent higher than estimated. While Pakistan continues to score poorly on doing business 
indicators, there are signs of improvement. Growth in FY16 was expected to be moderate at 4.5 
percent, well below the 5.5 percent target. For FY17, the expected growth is 5.2 percent while for 
FY18 it is projected at 5.5 percent.

Sectoral and Institutional Context

Pakistan’s agriculture sector is heavily depends on irrigation - more than 90 percent of production is 
form irrigated lands. However, per capita availability of useable water is decreasing with population 
growth, pollution and inefficient use of water. An estimated 40 percent of water is lost in the unlined 
watercourses due to seepage, spillage, side leakage and evapotranspiration. In Punjab, out of the total 
59,500 watercourses, about 43,700 were improved in various projects and Government’s National 
Program for Improvement of Watercourses (NPIW). Under PIPIPP 5,500 new watercourses are being 
improved leaving about 10,300 that still need improvements.

.

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Original Project Development Objective(s) - ParentPHORGPDO

The project?s main objective is to improve productivity of water use in irrigated agriculture. This will 
be achieved through improved physical delivery efficiency and irrigation practices, crop 
diversification and effective application of inputs that will translate into greater agricultural output per 
unit of water used. The project?s objectives would contribute to increased agricultural production, 
employment and incomes, higher living standards and positive environmental outcomes.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing

The project?s main objective is to improve productivity of water use in irrigated agriculture. This will 
be achieved through improved physical delivery efficiency and irrigation practices, crop 
diversification and effective application of inputs that will translate into greater agricultural output per 
unit of water used. The project?s objectives would contribute to increased agricultural production, 
employment and incomes, higher living standards and positive environmental outcomes.

Key Results 

The AF would support: (a) installation of high efficiency irrigation systems; (b) improvement of 
community irrigation systems; (c) introduction of modern technologies and methods in irrigated 
agriculture, assistance in crop diversification and training; and (d) Project management, construction 
supervision, quality control, technical assistance and training.

.

D. Project Description

The AF would provide resources for: (i) component B of the project related to upgrading of the 
Community Irrigation Systems; (ii) a new sub-component C3 is added focusing on post-harvest 
processing, value addition and market linkages; and (iii) make up for loss of resources due to changes 
in exchange rates between SDRs to USD.
PHCOMP

Component Name:
Upgrading of the Community Irrigation Systems
Comments ( optional)
W/Cs would be improved using only pre-cast concrete sections (PCPS) with water-tight joints. The 
WUAs/farmers would share costs through providing labor, and the Government of the Punjab 



would provide PCPS and other material needed for watercourse improvement. The AF would 
improve 2,000 W/Cs and irrigation schemes – making the total number of schemes under 
component B 11,000.

PHCOMP

Component Name:
Improved Agriculture Technology/Practices and Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments ( optional)
Changes in this component are based on implementation experience and lessons learnt. These 
changes include: (i) supplementing support under sub-component C1 and C2 for monitoring and 
evaluation and impact assessment of the additional works under the AF; and (ii) adding a new sub-
component to address value addition and market access for farmers adopting efficient irrigation 
technologies.

E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if 
known)
The AF project will be implemented in Punjab province of Pakistan. Agriculture in Punjab is affected 
by waterlogging and salinity. In central and southern Punjab, rainfall is more sporadic and agriculture 
is entirely irrigation dependent.

.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ahmad Imran Aslam( GEN06 )

Salma Omar( GSU06 )

II. IMPLEMENTATION
The implementation arrangements under the AF will remain the same as for the Original 
Project. The Director General Agriculture (Water Management) (DG-AWM) will continue to be 
responsible for the implementation of the Project. The Directorate of On-Farm Water 
Management (OFWM) has demonstrated that it has the capacity to implement such programs in 
the Punjab.
.

III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes The Government prepared an Environmental 
and Social Assessment (ESA) for the original 
project. An Addendum to ESA covering 
revised and up-scaled scope of work has also 
been prepared. The Addendum is cleared and 
disclosed. The key potentially negative 
environmental and social impacts of the 
proposed interventions under the AF project 
include changes in land use pattern 
particularly where barren/fallow land is 
brought under cultivation, contamination of 
soil and water caused by excessive use of 
agro-chemical inputs, salt build up in crop 
root zone, loss of natural vegetation and trees 
for water course improvement, loss of crops 
caused by water course improvement works, 



and reduced ground water recharge caused by 
water course lining.  These potential impacts 
are temporary and reversible in nature and can 
be mitigated with the help of appropriate 
mitigation measures, such as avoiding 
interventions in the environmental hot spots 
and wildlife protected areas when expanding 
the cultivation fields, awareness raising and 
capacity building of farmers for judicious use 
of chemical inputs, occasional flood irrigation 
in fields using high efficiency irrigation 
systems to avoid salt build-up in soil, tree 
plantation to compensate any tree cutting, 
avoiding cropped area while carrying out the 
water course improvement and other 
construction works during the project, and 
limiting the extent of water course lining in 
the sweet groundwater zone to minimize 
negative impacts on groundwater recharge. 
Some of the new activities proposed under AF 
may have additional environmental impacts 
like those related with disposal of waste and 
wastewater from fruit washing bays and 
cleaning platforms, construction related issues 
with small-scale platforms, and disposal of 
discarded fruits, vegetables (generally and 
largely biodegradable material). Occupational 
health and safety may be an additional 
potential environmental impacts for the new 
activities related to post-harvest processing 
centers. The Addendum proposes adequate 
mitigation measures for these issues and after 
the adequate implementation of mitigation 
measures, no residual impacts are forecasted.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No The project supports activities only in already 
disturbed environment and no project site is 
located in any natural habitat.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project does not support any activity in 
the forest land.

Pest Management OP 4.09 No The proposed interventions are likely to 
reduce the quantities of agro-chemicals 
particularly the ones that are water soluble.

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No The project activities will be undertaken 
where cultivation is being practiced for 
decades if not longer. Hence presence of any 
physical cultural resources is extremely 
unlikely.  Chance Find procedures are 
nonetheless included in the main ESA.



Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No There are no indigenous communities in 
project area.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No No land acquisition is envisaged for the 
proposed activities.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project does not include any component, 
which involves construction of new or 
rehabilitation/upgradation or renovation of 
any existing dam.

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50

Yes An exemption to notification was obtained for 
the original project that also applies to the AF.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 
7.60

No The project is located in the Punjab province, 
which does not have any disputed area as 
defined in the policy.

.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project prepared an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) report, which suggests 
that the proposed project does not pose any long term or irreversible adverse environmental 
impacts. The key potentially negative environmental and social impacts of the proposed 
interventions under the original project include changes in land use pattern particularly where 
barren/fallow land is brought under cultivation, contamination of soil and water caused by 
excessive use of chemical inputs, salt build up in crop root zone, loss of natural vegetation and 
trees for water course improvement and reduced ground water recharge caused by water 
course lining.  Scope of additional work proposed under Component B does not bring in any 
additional or new environmental impacts other than those which have already been covered in 
the ESA prepared for the original project. New activities proposed under Component C3 may 
have additional environmental impacts like those related with disposal of waste and 
wastewater from fruit/vegetable washing bays and cleaning platforms, construction related 
issues with small-scale washing bays and platforms, and disposal of discarded fruits, 
vegetables (generally and largely biodegradable material). Occupational health and safety 
may be an additional potential environmental impacts for the new activities related to post-
harvest processing centers. These potential impacts are temporary and reversible in nature and 
can be mitigated with the help of appropriate mitigation measures, such as avoiding 
interventions in the environmental hot spots and wildlife protected areas when expanding the 
cultivation fields, awareness raising and capacity building of farmers for judicious use of 
chemical inputs, occasional flood irrigation in fields using high efficiency irrigation systems 
to avoid salt build-up in soil, tree plantation to compensate any tree cutting, avoiding cropped 
area while carrying out the water course improvement and other construction works during 
the project, and limiting the extent of water course lining in the sweet groundwater zone to 
minimize negative impacts on groundwater recharge. The Addendum proposes adequate 
mitigation measures for the issues arising out of the implementation of component C3 and 
after the adequate implementation of proposed mitigation measures, no residual impacts are 
forecasted. Land acquisition will not be required for the project rehabilitation works, which 



will be undertaken within their existing boundaries.  There are no indigenous communities in 
the project areas as defined under World Bank OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. The project 
will support livelihoods through improvements in food harvesting and handling of produce. In 
particular, women may benefit from these interventions through decreased work load in post-
harvest processing. The community water course improvement will benefit agricultural 
communities’ especially small farmers.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area:

Agriculture and irrigation development are key priorities of the Government’s development 
agenda with the aim to improve agricultural productivity, irrigation efficiency and livelihood 
of the people. The long term impacts of the project will contribute to reduction in poverty in 
conjunction with environmental protection.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.

The ESA report elaborates on various project alternatives including, ‘no project’ option, 
alternative irrigation methods, alternative land-leveling methods, alternative methods of on-
farm water conservation and alternative methods of implementation. Analysis concluded that 
high efficiency irrigation results in reduced need of farm inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides, 
fungicides, and herbicides, as well as reduced vulnerability of crops to pest attacks and 
proliferation of weeds, leading to less use of pesticides and herbicides. In addition, fertigation 
(application of fertilizers or other soil additives through the irrigation system) is done through 
drip and sprinkler, which results in increased effectiveness of fertilizers with reduced 
quantities needed.  Similarly, through high efficiency irrigation systems, chemigation 
(application of pesticides, fungicides, and herbicides) is also done through drip and sprinklers, 
resulting in effective use of chemicals with reduced quantities needed. The overall result of 
high efficiency irrigation system is therefore a much reduced usage of chemical inputs and 
introduction of post-harvest technology under AF will help better achieve the PDO. The only 
comparable alternative for this activity is ‘no project option’.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The original ESA is based on detailed assessment and includes an Environment and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) for any possible environmental and social impacts under the 
project. The Addendum to the ESA uses the same ESMP with some additions related to the 
proposed activities under Component C3 and proposes preparation of a separate ESMP for 
each post-harvest fruit/vegetable processing facility. These ESMPs will need to be cleared by 
the Bank before these facilities can be established. For establishing these facilities, transparent 
and accessible guidelines on the selection process will be established, and communicated 
widely to all farmers to ensure that the selection process is seen as transparent and fair, and 
possible social conflict is avoided. The ESA Addendum is cleared and disclosed.
The original ESA report presents a well-structured organogram for the implementation 
arrangements of EMP. The Director General Agriculture Water Management (DG-AWM) is 
overall responsible for environmental and social performance of the project in accordance 
with the national and WB requirements. An officer is designated as the Environmental and 
Social Coordinator (ESC) for ensuring effective implementation of ESMP. The ESC 



coordinates with the WMOs at the district level, who have been designated as the district 
environmental and social coordinators (DESCs) at district level. The DESCs supervise and 
coordinate with the WUAs and farmers for the actual implementation of the environmental 
and social guidelines and other ESMP requirements. These institutional arrangements have 
been effective in ESMP implementation of the original project and will be continued for AF 
project.
The Project Implementation and Supervision Consultant (PISC) are responsible for 
implementation of ESMP while M&E Consultants are responsible for monitoring. Production 
and maintenance of all documentation outlined in ESMP is to be done by PISC. The client has 
been successfully implementing the ESMP in the original project and understands fully the 
planning and operational levels of safeguards requirements. While GD-AWM does not have 
an environmental management unit within its operational hierarchy, it continues to implement 
project level implementation of ESMP. The implementation performance of environmental 
safeguards in the original project is satisfactory. Quarterly progress reports are done regularly 
and will continue for the AF. Training is conducted for field staff as outlined in the ESA and 
these will continue for the AF. Monitoring will include both quantitative and qualitative data 
through consultations and feedback from beneficiaries, especially women, and will be 
included in the progress reports.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders consulted at various levels include: (i) People directly affected by the 
Project and Project beneficiaries (i.e., farmers, WUA members, and other villagers), (ii) Sales 
and service companies, (iii) Officials from the Agriculture Department and agriculture 
research institutes, (iv) Environment Protection Agency of Punjab, (v) Academia, (vi) Donors, 
and (vii) NGOs, international organizations, and other interest groups. Consultations with the 
project stakeholders were carried out during preparation of original ESA. The stakeholders 
have remained involved during the implementation including the project affected people, 
project beneficiaries and other local communities in several districts. Similar consultations 
were carried out for AF project during the preparation of the ESA Addendum and will 
continue during the implementation of the AF.

.

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Turkey Resilient Landscape Integration Project (TULIP) (P172562) 

 
 

  
Mar 12, 2020 Page 1 of 15  

     

      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Apr-2020 | Report No: PIDC28743 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Turkey P172562  Turkey Resilient 
Landscape Integration 
Project (TULIP) 
(P172562) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Sep 28, 2020 Dec 17, 2020 Environment, Natural 
Resources & the Blue 
Economy 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Turkey General Directorate of 
Forestry (Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to strengthen integrated management of natural resources at the landscape level 
and increase access to climate-resilient infrastructure to communities in targeted areas of the Bolaman Basin. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 300.00 

Total Financing 300.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 300.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 300.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
tbd 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Turkey has achieved commendable economic and social development results between 2000 and 2016. GDP per 

capita more than doubled from US$4,200 in 2000 to US$9,505 in 2018. Poverty incidence more than halved over 2002-

2015, and extreme poverty fell even faster from 13 to 3.1 percent. During this period, Turkey urbanized dramatically, 

maintained strong macroeconomic and fiscal policy frameworks, opened to foreign trade and finance, harmonized many 

laws and regulations with European Union (EU) standards, and greatly expanded access to public services. However, 

growing economic vulnerabilities and a challenging external environment have threatened to undermine the 

sustainability of these achievements in the last few years. Turkey experienced a period of economic overheating in late 

2017 and early 2018 and intense market volatility in mid-2018, resulting in contracting economic output, rising 

unemployment (from 10 percent in January 2018 to 14 percent in mid-2019), and high inflation (estimated at around 15 

percent in September 2019). Recent adjustments in the Turkish economy have lessened external vulnerabilities and 

contributed to a more stable Lira. The economy grew in the first half of 2019 and has stabilized in the short-term. 

Nevertheless, stagnating output, high costs of production, and high consumer prices have also led to significant job losses 

and falling real wages. Poorer households have been most impacted because many low-income workers are employed 

in construction and agriculture – the sectors that saw a significant decline in jobs. Large regional disparities continue to 

persist, as rural poverty remains higher than urban poverty1. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
2. Turkey has made progress in relatively decoupling growth from a range of environmental pressures, but rapid 

population growth, urbanization, and industrialization continue to take a heavy toll on the country’s natural resources 

and the environment2. Soil erosion, land degradation, and desertification are among the most severe environmental 

problems in Turkey. Soil erosion, mostly caused by human factors coupled with geographic, topographic, climatic, and 

soil characteristics, is observed at very large scales, affecting about 86% of Turkey’s lands3 and putting most of the country 

under risk of desertification4. Turkey has undertaken considerable afforestation efforts for erosion control, adding a total 

of 2.14 million hectares of forest land since 1973. Despite this increase in forest cover, about 43% of Turkey’s forests 

(9.64 out of 22.34 million hectares) are degraded5, and the deterioration of forest ecosystems and their associated 

ecosystem services and loss of biodiversity continue to be critical issues6. Water quality and scarcity are also of grave 

concern as they affect the availability of water resources for human consumption and economic uses. Deforestation, 

sedimentation, discharges of untreated industrial and domestic effluents into freshwater bodies and the sea, 

insufficiency of wastewater treatment facilities, and diffuse nitrogen and ammonia pollution from agricultural activities, 

all contribute to decreased water quality. By international standards, Turkey is currently considered a water-stressed 

country and, with rapid population growth, is predicted to be water-scarce by 20307. In addition to natural resource 


degradation problems, Turkey is also vulnerable to a range of natural disasters, with floods and landslides being the 

second (25.3 percent) and third (7.4 percent) most frequent and disastrous hazards after earthquakes8. Floods and 

landslides in Turkey are directly linked to topography, land use, land cover, urbanization levels, and rainfall regimes. 

Between 1975 and 2015, 1209 floods were recorded, causing loss of 720 lives and damaging 894,474 hectares of land. 

The amount of average annual property damage caused by floods has reached 300 million Turkish Liras. Hazardous floods 

are mostly observed in the Black Sea, Mediterranean, and Western Anatolia regions9. 

 
3. Climate change is expected to further exacerbate the pressure on the natural resource base of Turkey. The 

country is already experiencing an increase in annual mean temperature and changes in the precipitation regime. A long-

term downward trend in average yearly precipitation is projected for overall Turkey, although the distribution pattern 

varies across locations. The Eastern Black Sea and northeastern parts of the country will likely experience an increase in 

average annual precipitation, while the southern regions will experience a decrease. Projected climate change impacts 

include reduction in surface water availability, more frequent and severe incidences of floods, and more prolonged 

droughts. With a mostly arid and semiarid climate and environment, increased frequency and severity of droughts and 

extreme precipitation events will negatively affect water holding capacity of the upper layers of the soil, further 

exacerbating soil erosion and increasing the risks of flooding and landslides, particularly in terrains with rough 

topography10. More frequent droughts will negatively affect crop yields and threaten food security, while floods and 

landslides will continue to affect the safety and welfare of hundreds of thousands of people. Without accelerated actions, 

the combination of climate-induced hazards, a degrading natural resource base, and water scarcity and quality issues will 

increasingly affect societal wellbeing and act as constraints on growth. Poor rural communities whose livelihoods depend 

on natural resources will be disproportionately affected11, which could lead to an increase in rural-to-urban migration. 

 
4. Recognizing the importance of adapting to the impacts of climate change and protecting the country’s natural 

capital to sustain current gains, Turkey’s Eleventh Development Plan for the 2019-2023 period pays significant 

attention to a sustainable and inclusive growth pathway.  The Plan places “Livable Cities and Sustainable Environment” 

among its five fundamental pillars of development. Priorities and targets embraced under this pillar include reduction of 

environmental pollution, protection of biodiversity, and sustainable management and use of land, forest, water, and 

other natural resources through integrated watershed management. This pillar also includes targets to ensure access to 

healthy drinking water, including appropriate waste water treatment, combat poverty, promote the employability of 

rural labor force, prevent and mitigate disaster risks, and develop climate adaptation capacity and resilience of affected 

communities. The Plan highlights agriculture and forestry as one of the three priority development areas and emphasizes 

the need to bridge regional disparities and increase job opportunities and employment of women and youth12. 

 
5. Natural resource management in Turkey is guided by a multitude of sectoral strategies and plans, however 

integration among them is currently low. The Turkey National Forestry Program (2004 – 2023) has the objective to 

ensure sustainable forest management, ecosystems and biodiversity conservation, and efficient use of forest resources, 

with the participation of stakeholders, including local communities. A special emphasis is placed on the ecosystem 

services provided by forests, including soil conservation, water quality protection, prevention of desertification, erosion, 

and natural disasters, air quality regulation and carbon storage13. The National Strategy and Action Plan to Combat 

Desertification (2015-2023) aims at mitigating against the adverse effects of aridity, desertification, and land degradation 

and balancing conservation with efficient land use objectives14. The National Climate Change Action Plan (2011-2023) 

includes the objectives to increase the amount of carbon sequestered in forests and to reduce deforestation and 

associated GHG emissions from land use and land use change. The National Basin Management Strategy (NBMS) (2014-


2023) provides guidance for the medium and long-term investment programs for the sustainable management of 

Turkey’s 25 river basins15. Under the NBMS, River Basin Management Plans (RBMPs) are now been prepared for each of 

the basins to address the water quality and quantity issues and meet the ecological status for both surface and 

groundwater bodies as per the requirements of related EU water legislation, including the EU Water Framework 

Directive, Flood Directive, Drinking Water Directive, and Urban Waste Water Directive. The NBMS attempts to integrate 

the objectives of several relevant sectoral strategies and plans by promoting an integrated landscape-based ecosystem 

approach at basin or sub-basin scale, through coordinated efforts of related agencies and stakeholders to enhance the 

sustainability, while also improving the productivity of natural resources in Turkey’s river basins. Such integrated 

watershed/sub-basin management approach can address the interrelationships among land use, soil, and water and the 

interlinkage between upstream and downstream areas, and help link natural resources management with socioeconomic 

wellbeing and regional development.16 Nevertheless, the RBMPs (the planning tools under NBMS) that have been 

developed so far are highly water-focused and not sufficiently detailed to be operationalized at the sub-basin level. There 

is also a lack of integration among various basin-related plans (RBMPs, Flood Management Plans, Drought Management 

Plans, Sectoral Water Allocation Plans) and other sectoral plans including land use planning, spatial planning, and 

agricultural development plans. 

 
6. Institutional coordination also poses constraints to the implementation of integrated natural resources 

management (NRM) approaches in Turkey. Institutions directly involved in NRM include the Ministry of Agriculture and 

Forestry and its line agencies such as the General Directorate (DG) of Forestry, DG for Combatting Desertification and 

Erosion, DG of Agricultural Reform, DG of Water Management, and State Hydraulic Works (DSI); the Ministry of 

Environment and Urbanization, the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, the Disaster and Emergency Management 

Presidency under the Ministry of Interior, as well as the Provincial Directorates of these respective ministries, and local 

authorities, among others. The involvement of numerous institutions with often overlapping jurisdictions and 

responsibilities results in duplicities and fragmentation in management efforts, leading to inefficient use of public 

resources. The institutional arrangement for river basin management in Turkey is meant to bring these institutions 

together to coordinate their works, however, it has yet to be effectively implemented in practice.  

 
7. The Eastern Black Sea (EBS) Basin has the 3rd highest poverty rate (20.9%) in Turkey combined with a multitude 

of environmental challenges.17 The EBS Basin has the third-largest annual flow rate, after the Euphrates-Tigris and 

Eastern Mediterranean Basin18 and is home to approximately 2.46 million people19. It has a harsh mountainous 

topography with no extensive plains and the highest peak at 3,937 meters running parallel to shore. EBS has a prevailing 

humid-temperate Black Sea climate with the highest precipitation level in Turkey (averaged above 2500mm annually 

versus the national average of 574 mm)20. A combination of short rivers with rapid descending slopes, an abundance of 

snow and rains, and the highest rainfall level on the slopes facing the sea make EBS highly flood-prone, with flooding 

being the most commonly occurred natural disaster in EBS (39% of the total number of disasters). Climate-induced 

change in precipitation will likely further exacerbate flood risks. Additionally, soil erosion and landslide-caused disasters 

are prevalent in EBS due to topography, morphological structure, lithology, climate characteristics such as heavy 

precipitation, and land use change. The transformation of natural vegetation for hazelnut and tea cultivation since the 

1950s in the region has resulted in the formation and increased frequency of landslides.21 Landslide frequency is higher 

in the elevation range of 0-500 meters due to slope instability connected to the conversion of forest areas into hazelnut 

gardens and road construction.22 Despite the abundance in annual rainfall, EBS is considered water-stressed due to high 

seasonal rainfall variability, severe water pollution from agricultural and livestock activities, industrial and domestic 


     

waste discharges, and insufficient water storage capacity. EBS has four sub-basins, including Ordu-Giresun, Harşit Stream, 

Trabzon, and Rize-Artvin23. 

 
8. The Bolaman Basin, located within the Ordu-Giresun sub-basin of EBS, is an area severely challenged by 

landslides, flooding, and degradation of natural resources affecting the wellbeing and livelihoods of the local 

population. The Bolaman Basin has its distinct geographical boundaries and hydrological structure and covers an area of 

158,886 hectares almost entirely within the Ordu Province. With a population of 255,000, most of its residents live in 

rural areas across 97 villages, 53 of which are forest villages. Over 58 percent of the basin area is agricultural land, of 

which 39 percent is cultivated land, and 19 percent is pasture land. Forest land has been largely converted to hazelnut 

groves over the years and currently only accounts for 28.9 percent of the basin area. Hazelnut is cultivated monoculturally 

up to altitudes of 600-700 meters from the coast and accounts for 98 percent of cultivated lands. Ordu Province is the 

biggest hazelnut producer in Turkey. In 2018, Ordu produced 180,397 tons of hazelnut, accounting for 35 percent of the 

entire hazelnut production in Turkey with a total export value of US$3 billion. Hazelnut is almost the only source of 

income in all villages; the remaining comes from small-scale subsistence farming and livestock activities. Bolaman 

experiences a composite of problems typical for the EBS Basin, including soil erosion, degradation of forest ecosystems, 

surface water pollution, landslides, drought and floods. An estimated 457,411 tons of soil is moved annually due to 

erosion in the basin. Estimated annual point source and non-point source nitrogen and phosphorous pollution recorded 

in 2012 for the entire Ordu-Giresun sub-basin was the highest in EBS (6,866 tons/year and 421 tons/year, respectively)24. 

Drinking water in Bolaman is mostly supplied from surface water, and pollution of over 75 percent of surface water bodies 

seriously threatens the availability of drinking water sources for communities in Ordu. Turbidity problems experienced 

in heavy precipitation events and water level declines during episodes of drought further impede access to healthy 

drinking water. Ordu also experiences natural disasters that have caused the loss of life and properties to local 

communities. Between 1950 and 2011, 368 incidences of landslides, 44 incidences of flooding, and 36 incidences of falling 

rocks occurred in the province25. Landslides and floods due to excessive rainfall in 2016 and 2018 caused substantial 

damage to roads, settlements, bridges and agricultural and forest areas in Ordu.26 Recent landslide events resulted in the 

complete collapse of 15 and substantial damages to 30 houses and a flood in 2018 led to the collapse of a large bridge in 

the Ünye, Fatsa, and Çaybaşı districts. In 2019, a village completely collapsed by landslides in the Aybastı district and 

severe landslides affected the Kabataş district. The road system in the basin is frequently impacted and damaged by these 

disaster events, preventing access to markets and certain isolated settlements. Integrated solutions to the severe and 

multifaceted problems in the Bolaman Basin are urgently needed as this area has become a priority for the Government 

of Turkey (GoT). It also presents an opportunity for piloting innovative elements for integrated approaches to NRM that 

can generate valuable lessons for other basins in Turkey and the region. 

 
9. Turkey is well poised to pursue integrated approaches for the sustainable use of natural resources but lacks 

experience in current cost-effective innovations in NRM such as Nature-Based Solutions. Watershed management has 

evolved significantly since its inception. The first generation of watershed management projects in the 1970s and 1980s 

mostly applied an engineering approach to soil and water management with specific on-site and downstream physical 

outcomes. The investments were costly with limited benefits as the needs of upstream communities and their ownership 

of the interventions were not considered. The second generation of watershed management projects in the 1990s 

departed from this top-down engineering approach to focus more on farming systems and stakeholder participation, in 

order to create synergies between resources conservation and rural poverty reduction.27 In recent years, Nature-based 

Solutions (NBS), including Green Infrastructure (GI) and others, have been promoted as innovative, cost-effective and 

sustainable solutions to a variety of environmental, social, and economic challenges. NBS operationalizes the concept of 


ecosystem services to address specific problems and deliver multiple benefits such as buffering against natural disasters, 

regulating water, sequestrating carbon, and providing resources for sustaining livelihoods and economic activities.28 In 

many cases, combining GI with traditional gray infrastructure can create next generation solutions that can better protect 

communities by tackling the immediately pressing problems while restoring the regulatory functions of ecosystems that 

can enhance the performance, life cycle, and cost-effectiveness of gray infrastructure29. In the case of Turkey, this hybrid 

green-gray solution can prevent capital lock-in as most of the interventions implemented and planned at the basin level 

have been predominantly traditional gray infrastructure, which are highly expensive.30 In addition, previous investment 

operations spread out across large river basins have resulted in moderate visible results for local communities.  

 
Relationship to CPF 

 
10. The proposed project is aligned with the World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Turkey for the 

FY18-21 period and with the objectives of Turkey’s 11th Development Plan (2019–2023). The CPF sets out the overall 

objective of supporting Turkey in achieving more sustainable and inclusive development by focusing on growth, inclusion, 

and sustainability dimensions31. The proposed project will contribute to meeting CPF objective 9 (Increased sustainability 

of infrastructure assets and natural capitals) under the sustainability focus area to help Turkey orient its growth toward 

a more resilient and sustainable trajectory. 

 
11. The proposed project will also contribute to meeting Turkey’s sectoral objectives as set out in multiple national 

strategies and plans as well as commitments under global conventions. These include: (i) sustainable development 

objectives under the 11th Development Plan; (ii) voluntary national Land Degradation Neutrality targets for afforestation, 

soil conservation, and rehabilitation of forest lands and pastures per the commitments under the United Nations 

Convention on Combating Desertification and National Strategy and Action Plan to Combat Desertification (2015-2023); 

(iii) water quality and quantity as well as disaster reduction objectives in line with the EU Water Framework Directive, EU 

Flood Directive, Drinking Water Directive, Urban Waste Water Directive, and EU Integrated Environmental Approximation 

Strategy (2007-23); (iv) increased carbon capture and sink capacity of forests in line with the Intended National 

Determined Contribution under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and Turkey Climate Change Strategy 

(2010-2023); (v) climate change adaptation objectives per Turkey’s National Climate Change Adaptation  Strategy and 

Action Plan (2011-2023); and (vi) rural development and income generation for rural communities as targeted in the 

National Rural Development Strategy (2014-2020) and National Strategy for Regional Development (2014-2023). 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The project development objective is to strengthen integrated management of natural resources at the landscape level 
and increase access to climate-resilient infrastructure to communities in targeted areas of the Bolaman Basin. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
12. The key results expected by the project and respective PDO indicators (including Corporate Results Indicators, 

CRIs) are: 

i. Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (ha) (CRI) 
ii. Improved institutional capacity for integrated NRM at the national level (number of integrated NRM plans 

adopted for other basins) 


iii. People provided with increased access to climate-resilient infrastructure included in an integrated NRM plan 
(number, disaggregated by gender and type of service). Composite indicator including the following underlying 
indicators: 

a. People provided with increased protection against landslides and/or flooding 
b. People provided with access to improved drinking water supply (CRI) 
c. People provided with access to improved sanitation services (CRI) 
d. People provided with access to rural roads rehabilitated for climate and disaster resilience. 

13. Gender, GHG, citizen engagement, and additional CRIs will be included in the project’s Results Framework.  

 
D. Concept Description 

 
14. The proposed project will support the GoT in addressing the multitude of environmental challenges facing the 

Bolaman Basin in the Ordu province, while enhancing the livelihood security and resilience of local communities 

against the risks and impacts of climate-induced landslides, flooding, and drought. The project will adopt an integrated 

landscape management approach at the sub-basin scale (Boloman) to achieve these objectives. This integrated approach 

can help address the interlinked problems in Bolaman and rebuild the resilience of the social-ecological system within 

the sub-basin. Building on GoT and the Bank’s previous experience in watershed management, this project will design a 

participatory planning process to take into account inputs from different stakeholder groups, allowing for the 

coordination and integration of solutions among different government agencies as well as between government and local 

stakeholders. Such participatory planning approach will contribute to bridging various stakeholders within the NRM 

sphere and improving institutional coordination. The project will also deploy integrated green and gray infrastructure 

solutions as both short-term and long-term responses to mitigate the risks of landslides, floods, and drought, and 

enhance climate resilience of the local populations and ecosystems. NBS in combination with sustainable and climate-

smart agricultural practices will be designed based on sound technical, social, and financial analysis to achieve synergies 

between resources conservation and livelihood enhancement and ensure local stakeholders’ ownership and thus, the 

sustainability of project interventions.  

 
15. The integrated NRM approach of the project will generate valuable lessons and innovative elements that can 

be applied to other basins with similar problems in Turkey and in other countries. To demonstrate and promote an 

integrated landscape approach to NRM, the project will also include a technical assistance and capacity building sub-

component that will develop and employ planning tools at the landscape level to optimize the synergies and integration 

of interventions across the sub-basin and establish associated institutional structures.  

 
16. Theory of Change and Project design. The central problem statement the Project tries to address is that the 

degradation of natural resources and unsustainable land use, coupled with climate change, and the lack of appropriate 

infrastructures for landslide and flooding control, water and sanitation, and mobility are affecting the well-being and 

livelihoods of the local population in the Ordu province. The proposed operation will address these issues through six 

groups of interventions: (i) strengthening of institutional capacity for INRM; (ii) restoration of ecosystem functions and 

services; (iii) promotion of sustainable land use practices and diversification of rural livelihoods; (iv) construction of 

resilient flood and sedimentation control structures; (v) construction of resilient water and sanitation facilities; and (vi) 

climate and disaster-proofing of rural road network. These groups of activities, organized under three interlinked 

components, are expected to strengthen integrated management of natural resources at the landscape level and increase 

access to climate-resilient infrastructure for flood and landslide control, water and sanitation services, and mobility for 

communities under the project lifetime. In the long run, these intermediate outcomes will help reduce the vulnerability 

to natural disasters and climate change impacts and enhance their well-being and livelihoods of the population in the 

Ordu Province and other vulnerable areas. The three project components are described below along with a menu of 

activities that have been pre-identified at concept stage. The detailed project activities will be refined during preparation 

through the development of a feasibility study and technical assistance to identify the right mix of green and gray 

infrastructure in consultation with local stakeholders. 

 

 
 
17. Component 1: Green and sustainable rural development (~US100 million). The objective of this component is to 

restore and maintain the health, function, and productivity of critical ecosystems and promote sustainable land uses 

within the watershed to improve the sustainability of the natural resource base, enhance the livelihood security of local 

communities, and build resilience against climate-induced hazards. Investments will include a variety of green 

infrastructure measures, sustainable and climate-smart agricultural practices, and livelihoods diversification 

implemented by the General Directorate of Forestry (OGM) and the General Directorate of Agricultural Reform (TRGM) 

through their regional and provincial units. Forests play a key role in protecting soil cover and regulating water. Green 

infrastructure can improve the resilience and strengthen the functions of ecosystems and produce long-term climate 

adaptation and mitigation co-benefits such as soil, water and sediment retention, buffering extreme flood events, and 

reducing CO2 emissions. Green infrastructure can also provide habitats to enhance biodiversity and provide economic 

benefits through tourism and circular economy related activities. Increasing forest cover and improving forest health can 

help prevent soil erosion and landslides and reduce the impacts of floods. Green infrastructure will be designed in 

conjunction with gray infrastructure to optimize the functionality, cost-effectiveness, and resilience of the integrated 

natural and built system. Income generation and livelihood diversification for the rural poor enhance their livelihood 

security and welfare while reducing the pressure on the forest ecosystems upon which these communities traditionally 

depend. This will also contribute to reversing the current trend of outward migration of the local population. 

 

18. Sub-component 1.1: Green infrastructure and rural livelihoods. This subcomponent will be implemented by OGM 

and aim at restoring and sustainably managing ecosystems that provide resources for income generation to local 

communities and critical services for soil retention and water regulation that contribute to buffering against landslides 

and floods and regulating the flow and quality of water. The menu of activities under this sub-component will include: (i) 

afforestation and reforestation; (ii) erosion and sedimentation control works; (iii) upstream natural water retention and 

storage works; (iv) restoration of riparian ecosystems and stream corridors; (v) rehabilitation and climate-smart pasture 

management; (vi) maintenance and sustainable management of secondary forests; (vii) income generation and livelihood 

diversification activities for poor forest communities, such as bee-keeping, non-timber forest products, and ecotourism. 

 

19. Sub-Component 1.2: Sustainable agriculture and climate-resilient value chains. This sub-component will be 

implemented by TRGM with the aim to promote sustainable and climate-smart agricultural practices and associated 

climate-resilient agri-food value chains. The menu of activities under this sub-component will include: i) sustainable and 

climate-smart agricultural production practices such as terracing for hazelnut gardens to protect topsoil layer, micro-

dosing to reduce the application pesticides and fertilizers, agroforestry, and rainwater harvesting to manage soils and 

water sustainably; ii) diversification of agricultural production (kiwi, persimmon, mushroom, truffles vegetables) to 

reduce land areas used for hazelnut cultivation; iii) improvement of livestock productivity to reduce environmental and 

natural resources footprint; iv) climate resilient and energy-efficient agri-food value chains to enhance market access for 

local farmers; and v) branding and marketing of sustainably produced agricultural products. 

 

20. Component 2: Climate resilient gray infrastructure (~US$ 185 million). The objective of this component is to 

increase access to climate-resilient infrastructure systems for protection against climate-related disasters such as 

landslides and floods, and for provision of drinking water supply, sanitation, and mobility for local communities. Although 

the Bolaman Basin is an area with relatively high annual rainfall, the lack of access to drinking water is a major problem 

in the cities and small villages within the basin due to the increase in population (particularly during the tourist season), 

seasonal changes in precipitation, polluted surface and groundwater sources, and turbidity problems in heavy 

precipitation and flooding events. Currently, Bolaman has a population of approximately 255,000 people, and the 

required drinking water need is 600 lt/s. By 2070, the population in the basin is projected to be roughly 550,000 people, 

with drinking water needs expected to rise to 1300 lt/s. Adequate infrastructures to meet drinking water needs and 

protect surface water and groundwater resources from domestic and industrial pollution are much needed. Drinking 

water sources are further threatened as wastewater from domestic and industrial sources are mostly discharged directly 

into the natural environment without any treatment due to a lack of wastewater treatment facilities, which could also 




treat water for reuse for agricultural purposes. The high precipitation levels in the region make it easier for bacteria, 

parasites, and harmful chemicals from untreated discharges to reach creeks, lakes, and rivers network. Landslides and 

floods that frequently occur in Bolaman are of a disastrous nature, causing the loss of life, property, transport and other 

infrastructure. All of these problems are threatening the wellbeing of the local population and requiring immediate 

solutions that can be readily met through “no-regret” gray infrastructure measures. The design of these infrastructure 

systems will integrate green infrastructure into their plans to deliver more cost-effective and resilient services and extend 

their lifespan. The design will also include appropriate measures to withhold the impacts of climate change. This 

component will be implemented by State Hydraulic Works (DSI) and the General Directorate of Highways (KGM), in close 

coordination with the Ordu Metropolitan Municipality General Directorate of Water and Sewerage Administration (OSKI). 

The scope and specific locations for some of these investments have already been pre-identified by participating 

institutions and will be assessed during preparation through a feasibility study. 

 

21. Sub-component 2.1: Flooding, landslide, and sedimentation control works. This subcomponent will be 

implemented by DSI. The menu of investments considered includes: (i) multipurpose reservoirs for effective use and 

regulation of water resources in the basin; (ii) flood control structures, precipitation levees, and sediment control 

structures; and (iii) disaster emergency maintenance of existing infrastructures and repair works. 

 

22. Sub-component 2.2: Drinking water and wastewater treatment works. This subcomponent will also be 

implemented by DSI. The menu of investments considered includes: (i) drinking water infrastructure systems 

rehabilitation and development (including treatment plants and distribution networks); and (ii) wastewater 

infrastructure systems rehabilitation and development (including wastewater treatment plants and sewage networks). 

The design of these systems will include energy-efficient measures and measures to minimize non-revenue water loss 

and promote water reuse where possible. 

 

23. Sub-component 2.3: Climate-resilient rural road system. This sub-component will be implemented by KGM and 

will invest in measures such as drainage and walls to climate and disaster-proof rural road segments that are frequently 

and heavily damaged by landslides, floods, and falling rocks, with the aim to provide safe access and mobility to local 

communities and markets. 

 

24. Component 3: Institutional coordination, project management and sustainability (~US$15 million). The 

objective of this component is to strengthen the capacities and coordination among participating institutions, to ensure 

not only effective and efficient project implementation, but also to support the institutional structures and processes 

that need to be established in a sustainable way to support integrated NRM planning and management in both the project 

area and elsewhere. Implementation of this component will be the responsibility of OGM and will include the following 

two sub-components: 

 

25. Sub-component 3.1: Institutional coordination and sustainability. Activities under this component will include: 

(i) technical assistance for developing an integrated NRM model, which will include planning tools at the landscape level 

that can be replicated in other basins with similar problems in Turkey; (ii) strengthening of institutional coordination and 

capacity building to establish institutional structures for integrated NRM to support the replicability and sustainability of 

the approach implemented by the project. 

 

26. Sub-component 3.2: Project management, environment and social aspects, monitoring and evaluation. 

Activities under this component will include: (i) project management support, including strengthening technical, 

fiduciary, environment and social capacities of participating institutions; (ii) support for environmental and social 

management aspects, including grievance redress, citizen engagement and communications; and (iii) monitoring and 

evaluation.  

 

27. Climate change. The project is designed to take into account Turkey’s climate change vulnerability context. In 

particular, climate change is expected to result in more frequent and severe incidences of floods, more prolonged arid 

seasons, and a reduction in surface water availability across the country. Climate change will also further exacerbate soil 

erosion and increase the risks of landslides in vulnerable locations. The Bolaman Basin is an area already prone to soil 

erosion, landslides, and floods due to its mountainous topography with steep slopes, morphological structure, lithology, 

and heavy precipitation. Climate change will further exacerbate these problems. The availability of drinking water during 

dry months will also be worsened due to more prolonged dry seasons and drought periods. The proposed project is 

designed to address these problems and enhance the resilience of local communities in the project area against the risks 

and impacts of climate change and climate-related hazards. The project will do so by implementing integrated green-gray 

infrastructure solutions for mitigating against landslides and floods, rehabilitating rural road system to be climate and 

disaster-resilient, and promoting climate-smart agricultural practices to enhance the livelihood security of the local 

population. Thus, activities under sub-component 1.1., 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 will generate significant adaptation co-benefits. 

In addition, support for agricultural value chains under sub-component 1.2 and drinking water and wastewater treatment 

systems under sub-component 2.2 will include energy-efficient measures in their design and will generate mitigation co-

benefits. GHG accounting for applicable investments will be calculated using Bank approved methodologies in the 

subsequent stage of project preparation. 

 

28. Gender. The environmental and social impact assessment of the project will include a gender analysis of the 

conditions, needs, and aspirations of women and men living within the Bolaman Basin. The gender analysis will be 

conducted during project preparation to identify relevant gender gaps concerning rural livelihood, access to 

infrastructure (drinking water, sanitation, irrigation), and access to agricultural investments and services. The gender 

analysis will also help to define relevant actions and indicators to reduce identified gender gaps. A gender action plan will 

be developed for the project to guide the mainstreaming of efforts for equitable distribution of project benefits between 

men and women during and beyond implementation. 

 

29. Citizen Engagement. The project will establish effective participation of stakeholders through extensive Citizen 

Engagement activities at local and national levels during preparation and implementation. The project will explore 

extensive and meaningful stakeholder consultations through focus groups and surveys, and employ monitoring 

mechanisms such as satisfaction surveys, grievance redressal (GRM) and multi-stakeholder forums. Priority needs in local 

communities particularly among marginalized/vulnerable groups will be identified through participatory mechanisms 

under components 1 and 2, which will inform project design and implementation to ensure equitable distribution of 

project benefits. Under component 3, the project will support capacity building for government officials and community 

leaders on citizen engagement and efficient response to beneficiary/citizen needs. A detailed citizen engagement 

strategy that highlights mechanisms and actions for enhancing multi-stakeholder dialogue and inclusion throughout the 

project cycle will be designed. An indicator in citizen engagement will be included in the project’s Results Framework. 


Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
.




















































PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC33685

Project Name Poyang Lake Basin Town Water Environment Management Project 
(P153604)

Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) Wastewater Collection and Transportation (40%), Solid waste management 

(20%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (20%), Animal produc tion 
(20%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Pollution management and 
environmental health (30%), Water resource management (30%), Parti 
cipation and civic engagement (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P153604
Borrower(s) People's Republic of China
Implementing Agency Jiangxi Provincial Development and Reform Commission
Environmental 
Category

A-Full Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

27-Dec-2015

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

10-Jan-2016

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

02-Nov-2016

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

31-Mar-2017

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
China's rapid urbanization over the past three decades has facilitated impressive economic and 
social gains. The country became the second largest economy in the world in 2010, with over half of 
its population now living in cities. About 500 million people have been pulled out of poverty in the 
process. Further transition is projected to add another 300 million to China's urban population by 
2030 and continue boosting the economic growth. Unfortunately, China's economic gains came at a 
significant cost to its environment, with serious implications on health and quality of life, as 
environmental depletion and degradation were overlooked during China's impressive economic 
growth period. The cost of environmental degradation and resource depletion in China is estimated 


to approach 10 percent of GDP, of which water pollution accounts for 2.1 percent, based on China 
2030 Study estimates. The Government of China has recognized that it cannot continue on this road 
and has put in place plans to ensure the environmental sustainability of its economic development 
pathways.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The Chinese water sector suffers from both water quantity and quality challenges. In terms of water 
quantity, with 20 percent of the world's population but only 7 percent of its freshwater, water 
scarcity is a major problem for sustainable urban development in China. Moreover, there is also a 
strong disparity in spatial distribution of its water resources, as only 19 percent of China's water 
resources are available to 40 percent of the population in the north, where most of the major grain 
production is located, and in the west. In terms of water quality, due to environmentally 
unsustainable development trajectory pursued over the last three decades, a significant portion of 
China's freshwater sources are polluted. According to 2010 data, about 40 percent of rivers in China 
were seriously polluted and unfit for drinking water. Similarly, the groundwater quality in more 
than half of 200 cities surveyed was classified as 'bad' (in 40.3 percent of cities) or 'extremely 
bad' (14.7 percent). Similar figures are reported for the quality of other water bodies in the country, 
including lakes. 
 
Poyang Lake is the largest freshwater lake in China with a maximum surface area reaching 5,050 
km2 and a storage capacity - 30 billion m3. The basin area of the lake is about 162,200 km2 
covering over 97 percent of the land area of Jiangxi Province. The lake plays many vital functions, 
such as hydro-morphologic, environmental, social, cultural and economic; the livelihood of more 
than 40 million people is closely linked to the water and environment of Poyang Lake. Poyang Lake 
connects to Yangtze River in the middle reach at Hukou, Jiujiang County. The dynamics of the lake 
water movement is governed by both the stages of the Yangtze River and the discharges from its 
five major tributaries (Gan, Xin, Fu, Rao and Xin Rivers). While the annual water level in the 
Poyang Lake has remained stable in the recent years, the area of the lake fluctuates dramatically 
between the wet and dry seasons. In normal years, the average lake area is about 3,200 km2. The 
fluctuations are also affected by severe climate events, e.g., in early 2002, due to serious drought, 
the area of the lake reached a low of 200 km2.   
  
Poyang Lake is also a wetland of national and global importance, which provides a key habitat for 
half a million migratory birds. It is a house for over 95% of world's white crane, 60% of world??s 
white-napped cranes, 55% of world's hooded crane, 60% of world's white storks, and 96% of 
world's swan goose population. Poyang Lake is also a species gene pool with 156 kinds of aquatic 
plants, 136 planktons, 230 kinds of benthic animals, 58 kinds of fishes, 89 kinds of water birds, etc. 
It also plays a significant role in the seasonal flow regulation of the Yangtze River. The average 
amount of lake water entering the Yangtze River is about 150 billion m3, amounting to 15.6% of the 
mean annual runoff of the river.  
 
The water quality of the Lake has been comparatively good (with 83% falling under Class I ~ III, 
13% under Class IV, and 4% under Class V ). However, research results of the World Bank 
supported TCC5 project and the available monitoring data of Ministry of Environmental Protection 
show a concerning trend of water quality deterioration, with chemical oxygen demand (COD) and 
ammonia-nitrogen (NH3-N) gradually increasing and dissolved oxygen (DO) gradually decreasing. 
The existing data on COD discharge collected by the local governments in the lake basin show that 
domestic wastewater (about 60%) and solid waste disposal (about 30%) produce the major water 

pollution. While industrial pollution remains an issue, discharges from industries are gradually 
decreasing. Site visit also found uncontrolled solid waste disposal and insufficient treatment, and 
improper fish feeding and improper habit of farm land fertilizing also lead to severe water pollution. 
By provincial environmental statistics, only 79% of domestic wastewater is treated in urban areas of 
Jiangxi province, which is much lower than the national average of 85%. Similarly, solid waste 
collection and treatment rate in the province is 69% compared to the national average of 80%.   
 
Conclusions from recent studies and discussions with Provincial governments identify the following 
key causes for increase of pollution levels in the waterbodies feeding into Poyang Lake: (a) lack of 
basin wide integrated water/environment management; (b) weak water quality and pollution source 
pollution monitoring and disclosure system; (c) lack of public awareness and incentives in the 
communities on environmental protection; (d) weak enforcement of regulations related to disposal 
of untreated industrial and domestic wastewater directly into water bodies; (e) lack of investment in 
infrastructure for wastewater collection and treatment systems in urban and rural areas as well as for 
solid waste management in the small cities and towns and rural areas; and (f) lack of use of good 
practices on proper domestic solid waste disposal and agriculture practices. 
 
Government of China and Jiangxi Provincial government recognize the needs to protect the Lake. 
Series of measures have been triggered at national, provincial, and county levels to protect the value 
the Poyang Lake as a unique resource and a national heritage, and to control the lake's pollution and 
to restore the vital water quality and its associa ted functions. The Government of China issued the 
Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Zone Development Plan (PLEDP) in 2009 focusing on 
ecological development of Poyang Lake. Under the PLEDP, there is an implementation plan and 18 
specific sector plans, including water environment management, water resources, five river 
management plan, etc. In 2014, Jiangxi government also issued a plan for establishment of 
ecological and civilization demonstration areas, stating actions and targets for industrial, domestic 
wastewater and solid waste management. Based on the plan, by 2020, COD would be decreased by 
5% compared to the 2015 baseline, wastewater treatment ratio would reach 90% and urban solid 
waste treatment ratio - 85%. The PLEDP together with other relevant sector plans foresee 
significant increase in size of population and economic activity by 2020, with the focus on tourism 
industry. This, together with unresolved improvements in infrastructure, is expected to result in big 
pressure on water quality in the lake basin. 
 
Following the series government plans, the government of Jiangxi has been conducting six major 
ecological environment protection group projects: (a) Poyang Lake wetland and biodiversity 
protection projects; (b) Poyang Lake-rim green belt projects; (c) pollution prevention and control 
projects including wastewater, solid waste and non-point agricultural pollution control; (d) blue sky 
action demonstration projects; (e) circular economy, energy conservation, and emission reduction 
projects; and (f) ecological cultural projects. 
 
In 2013, the World Bank approved the Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone 
Small Town Development Project with the objective to improve key public services in participating 
small towns of Jiangxi Province through improvements to priority infrastructure. Though overall 
project implementation has been satisfactory, there are a number of challenges including the rapid 
urbanization rendering some of the sub-projects irrelevant/unviable, capacity constraints and issues 
related to O&M for wetland, solid waste and wastewater facilities. The proposed project would 
expand the coverage to include seven additional counties, particularly focusing on water 
environment management and solid waste management infrastructure while taking into account 

lessons from the Small Town Development Project and incorporating in its design best international 
practices.  
 
Note : Chinese surface water quality standards: Class I is good quality water which with simple 
purification is drinkable (DO>7.5mg/l; COD<15; BOD5<3; NH3-N<0.15; P<0.02); Class II is good 
quality water which is slightly contaminated, drinkable after normal purification (DO>6mg/l; 
COD<15; BOD5<3; NH3-N<0.5; P<0.1); Class III contaminated water which could be drinkable 
after treatment (DO>5mg/l; COD<20; BOD5<4; NH3-N<1; P<0.2); Class IV water is not drinkable 
(DO>3mg/l; COD<30; BOD5<6; NH3-N<1.5; P<0.3); and Class V is bad quality water (DO>2mg/
l; COD<40; BOD5<10; NH3-N<2; P<0.4).

Relationship to CAS
The project is aligned with the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 2013-2016, specifically the 
objectives set under focus area I --"Supporting greener growth", including Enhancing Urban 
Environmental Services; Promoting Sustainable Agriculture Practices; and Demonstrating 
Sustainable Natural Resource Management. The project design is in line with the national strategic 
development plan of China, as envisioned in the Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Zone 
Development Plan (2009) and Jiangxi Province implementation plan for establishment of ecological 
and civilization demonstration areas (2014). The project is also in line with 12th Five-year Plans 
and draft 13th Five-year plan at Jiangxi provincial and county levels. 
  
The project is expected to contribute to both China??s national strategy on water security agenda 
and to the World Bank Group twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. 
Water security has become a high priority at highest for decision makers at all levels (central and 
local government). The strategy focuses on applying systematic treatment and combination of 
structural and non-structural measures in water sector to promote ecological safety, economic 
security and the safety of human health and lives. The project would contribute to, through 
integrated and participatory approaches, sustainable water/environment management, improvement 
of ecological condition, promotion of social and economic environment of Poyang Lake Basin, as 
one of the key areas of Chinese water system. 
 
For the contribution to the twin goals, as the poor are known to live relatively closer to degraded 
and polluted areas, and have less access to water and solid waste disposal infrastructure, they are 
expected to directly benefit from the project. The project will aim at addressing specific challenges 
that the poor, vulnerable and women face, as identified through social assessment. The project is 
also expected to boost shared prosperity, as improved water quality and local living conditions will 
likely result in such benefits as increase in land value, access to income earning opportunities etc.     
 
To achieve maximum impact and to address the higher strategic objectives indicated above, the 
project will incorporate an "integrated" approach in the design of the activities in selected counties, 
and focus on enhancement of ecological and institutional sustainability of water/environment and 
strengthening of domestic wastewater and solid waste management system. This will involve 
participation of communities during project preparation and implementation as well as in designing 
long-term operation & maintenance mechanisms to ensure sustainability of the investments. 
Ultimately, successful implementation of the project will help to facilitate the improvement and 
restoration of water quality and ecological environment of the Poyang Lake basin. It would also 
contribute towards the enhancement of water regime in the Yangtze River. 
 

Note :   "Integrated approach" refers to a mechanism whereby structural and non-structural 
measures are fully utilized, as well as whereby management of environmental protection is done in 
a collaborative and coordinated way throughout the project cycle involving all stakeholders (from 
different sectors and disciplines) and based on consensus building to ensure sustainability.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
The project development objective is to reduce the pollutant discharge into key selected waterways 
in the Poyang Lake basin and to improve management of water environment.

Key Results (From PCN)
The proposed PDO level results indicators include: (a) Direct project beneficiaries (core sector 
indicator), of which female beneficiaries; (b) Nutrient load reduction (nitrogen (N) and Phosphorus 
(P)) achieved under the project (core sector indicator, tons/year); (c) Volume (mass) of COD 
pollution load reduction achieved under the project (core sector indicator, tons/year); (d) domestic 
solid waste reduced or recycled under the project (core sector indicator; tons/year); (e) Increased 
number of counties in full compliance with Provincial Water and Environmental Protection 
Guidelines . 
 
Note :   The guidelines broadly include elements such as citizen participatory engagement and 
institutional capacity to undertake regular water monitoring, reporting and enforcement.

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
a. Overview.  
 
The Jiangxi Provincial Government proposes to utilize the World Bank loan in managing the water 
environment in the key towns of Poyang Lake Basin. Seven counties - Duchang, Poyang, Yugan, 
Jishui, Fengxin, Jingan, Shangli, have been selected for project planning and implementation; total 
population of the seven counties are about 5 million. These seven counties represent a mixed pattern 
of geographic distribution across the basin: three sites are in close proximity to the main Lake, one 
site along the mid-stream of a main river draining into the Lake, two sites adjacent to the tributary 
streams of a main river, and one site at the remotest distance from the Lake. The water quality of 
Poyang Lake is closely associated with the quality and environment of the water and land bodies in 
these contributing catchments, and vice versa.  
 
The project is designed to integrate different ways of environmental protection to improve the water 
quality of Poyang Lake basin, including by means of wastewater treatment and solid waste 
management, as well non-structural measures. As such, the project will focus not only on 
engineering aspects but also on enhancing institutional mechanisms, improving operation and 
maintenance (O&M) and monitoring systems to help the selected counties in Jiangxi Province to 
enhance water environmental services, including wastewater collection and treatment systems, 
urban storm water management, river and lake environment restoration, solid waste collection and 
transportation system, and participatory integrated environment management system.  
 
b. Proposed Project components.  
 


The proposed project activities consist of four main components as below:  
 
Component 1: Strengthening Institutional Capacity for Managing Water Environment in Poyang 
Lake Basin (US$15 million): This component will finance capacity building and awareness raising 
activities to improve participatory wastewater and solid waste management, enforcement of 
environmental regulations and creating pre-conditions for sustainability of project results. The 
component will be structured in two key sub-components: (a) institutional capacity building and 
enforcement and (b) sustainable Poyang Lake basin management.  
 
Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Capacity Building and Enforcement (USD11 million): This sub-
component will finance activities related to: (a) strengthening of the current integrated Poyang Lake 
Basin management institutional architecture (River manager as leader of the party - River 
implementer as the mayor of the county - high level leading group for strategic orientation and 
guidance, and Poyang Lake water/environment financial and investment mechanism study; (b) 
strengthen Basin-wide water/environment management planning: (i) support an integrated 
vulnerability and sensitivity assessment of Poyang Lake (water quality improvement and protection- 
water quantity control - land uses change -biodiversity conservation- urbanization and demographic 
changes- tourism impact and industrialization-basin pollution, and providing comments on 
integrated action plan leading to series of projects with implementation sequencing and synergies in 
line with the long-term commitment) along with resilience and adaptation measures; (ii) promotion 
of integrated basin plans for the five tributaries of the Poyang Lake; (c) strengthening knowledge 
sharing of integrated lake management and establish Lake management advisory platform - with the 
continuous pressure on water resources, the lakes under environmental stress are evidenced across 
China; and (d) strengthening the water/environment monitoring system through upgrade/newly 
installation of water/environment monitoring facilities, enhancement of the integrated monitoring 
information system, early warning system, real-time data disclosure etc. 
 
Sub-component 1.2: Sustainable Poyang Lake Basin Management (USD4 million): This sub-
component will finance activities related to enhancing conditions for lake basin environmental 
management sustainability, including: (a) enhancement of citizen participation and information 
disclosure - translating the high level ownership of the Poyang protection to grassroots level could 
contribute to the rapid and broader success of the Poyang Lake conservation. Building on the 
institutional structure and ecological compensation mechanism, the citizen participation could 
involve labor corporations (fishermen, farmers, factory workers and industries etc.) in having a 
voice in Poyang Lake protection; and (b) ensuring soundness of infrastructure design and its O&M 
sustainabilityÂ¡Âª the project will aim to increment the quality of innovation and appropriate 
technology with the economics of their financing for sustainable operation and maintenance 
implementation; and strengthening of incentive mechanisms, i.e., the compensation scheme for 
ecological protection of the Poyang Lake that could be further strengthened building on proven 
incentive mechanisms; 
 
Component 2: Improvement of Lake and River Environmental Restoration and Enhancement of 
Domestic Wastewater Management System (US$ 140 million). This component will finance 
activities related to protection and restoration of the water environment of selected rural and urban 
water environments in Poyang Lake basin through collection and treatment of urban and rural 
wastewater; collection and safe disposal of stormwater from both rural and urban watersheds; and 
implementation of integrated engineering and biological as well as Low Impact Development (LID) 
interventions in selected rural and urban waterways.  The aim of the component is to demonstrate an 


Integrated water
shed management approach by focusing on key areas for protection, improving 
water quality and environmental protection caused by the municipal wastewater and aquaculture 
sources, and establishing ecological pollution-control zones along the course of pollutant movement.
 
Sub-component 2.1: Improvement of Lake and River Environmental Restoration (USD66 million): 
This sub-component will finance implementation of integrated engineering and biological 
mitigation measures and Low Impact Development (LID) in selected small lakes, rivers, and 
catchments in Poyang Lake basin. This will include restoration of water environment in Zhuhu Lake 
in Poyang county, Pipa Lake (river) in Yugan county, and ecological restoration of stream corridor 
of Zoujiazui River in Duchang county. Key activities will include construction of stormwater 
collection and diversion systems from upland watersheds, rural wastewater treatment facilities, 
distributed wastewater collection along lake banks, introduction of good aquaculture practices (for 
fishing farming and pearl culture) and water environment monitoring system.  
 
Sub-component 2.2: Enhancement of Domestic Wastewater Management System (USD74 million): 
This sub-component will finance rehabilitation and expansion of urban wastewater collection and 
treatment systems to improve capacity of wastewater collection and treatment of selected counties. 
Main project activities include: construction of wastewater collection networks (including 
household connections); and construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater treatment plants in 
Duchang, Jiang'an, and Jishui counties.  
 
Component 3: Construction of solid waste collection and transportation system (USD75 million): 
This component is to improve solid waste collection and transportation system in rural and urban 
areas to reduce solid waste disposal to river system of Poyang Lak Basin. This component will 
finance setting up solid waste separation system, construction of solid waste collection stations and 
transportation stations, and establishment of sustainable solid waste collection and transportation 
system, and establishment of monitoring and management systems in Shangli, Duchang, Poyang, 
Yugan, and Jing'an Counties. 
 
Component 4: Project Implementation Support (USD15 million). This component is to support the 
effective and efficient implementation of the project activities. This component will finance project 
management, project implementation supervision, project social, resettlement and environmental 
monitoring, domestic and international training and study tours, and relevant project management 
equipment and facilities. Main project activities will include procurement of office equipment, 
domestic and international training and study tours, procurement of project implementation 
supervisors, procurement of social and resettlement and environmental monitoring services, etc. 
 
d. Gender. 
 
There is strong evidence that gender inequalities contribute to poverty and reduce human well-
being, and that gender issues are an important dimension of the fight against poverty. In water 
supply operations specifically, there has long been an understanding of importance of incorporating 
a gender perspective, because women and girls are most often the primary users, providers and 
managers of water in their households and are the guardians of household hygiene. Limited access 
to water and poor water quality have direct impact on household welfare and health. If a water 
system falls into disrepair, women are the ones forced to travel long distances over many hours to 
meet their families' water needs. Therefore, women and girls benefit most when services are 
improved. Given women's household roles and responsibilities, they are also more likely to impact 


decisions related to ways to collect and dispose the domestic waste. Finally, women can greatly 
contribute to oversight of a well-functioning community enforcement of environmental reg  ulations 
and also such aspects as decisions related to water and solid waste collection fee levels.  
 
Worldwide good performance on gender mainstreaming in projects requires: (a) carrying out a 
gender analysis as part of the project's social assessment; (b) introducing relevant design elements; 
and (c) tracking project performance through the inclusion of gender disaggregated indicators. The 
project will conduct a standalone social assessment, in which a close attention to gender aspects will 
be paid. This will include investigating on and consulting with female beneficiaries in the project 
areas in order to clearly identify their needs and concerns, as well as possible project impacts, and 
explore both mitigation measures of such impacts and opportunities for women targeted activities to 
achieve project objectives. The project design will particularly emphasize female participation in 
project activities, capacity building and M&E activities. Specific indicator(s) related to women's 
participation will be included in the Results Framework and will be closely monitored during 
project implementation. 
 
e. Lessons learned from Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone Small 
Town Project 
 
There are valuable lessons of Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Zone Small Town Project 
implementation that will be taken into account during further design of the proposed project. The 
on-going project faces challenges in terms of institutional capacity and inter-departmental 
coordination, issue that is also observed in other provinces in China. Collaboration in controlling 
and reducing substances at their source is the most effective way of keeping pollutants out of the 
lake. This requires clarity of responsibilities of each authority, as well as full collaboration to meet 
the joint objective. While industrial pollution control is under the responsibility of provincial 
Environmental Protection Department (EPD), agricultural land and aquaculture pollution control is 
managed by the provincial Agriculture Department (AD).   
 
To address these problems, it is critical that county Government maintains ownership of the 
proposed sub-projects, even with the change of the county leadership to ensure continued focus on 
initially agreed project activities and development objectives. Similarly, continuity and retention of 
project staff at the county level (including PMOs, PLGs and Expert Groups) is important to ensure 
good capacity developed under the project is maintained. Finally, the project will also raise 
awareness among communities and farmers.  
 
Equally important is to considerably strengthen institutional coordination mechanisms, not just for 
project purposes, but also for future management of the Lake. It would be important to assign a 
function of responsibility to review development proposals in the basin with a view on their 
implications on the Lake water quality to one of the institutions that is currently managing Poyang 
Lake, or to establish a Poyang Lake Management Commission. The institution would also be 
responsible to spearhead the improvement/ restoration of the Lake water quality over the long run. 
This entity could include representatives of relevant provincial and county governments, as well as 
concerned citizens and academic or research agencies.  
 
f. Global Lessons Learned and World Bank's Value Added 
 
World Bank participation has the added benefit of introducing and replicating, where possible, 


international best practices in the management of water body pollution control and environmental/
ecological improvement. Lessons learned from World Bank-financed pollution control and 
ecological restoration projects (such as Danube Water Program; Iran Northern Cities Water Supply 
and Sanitation Project to reduce pollutant loads to the Caspian Sea; Lake Victoria Environmental 
Protection Project; Aral Sea Restoration Project; Integrated Water Management in Metropolitan Sao 
Paulo Project) as well as lessons from other countries' experiences (such as the Great Lakes and 
Chesapeake Bay restoration programs in the US) are being used to inform the key concept of the 
project, and include: (a) investments in infrastructure upgrading needs to be matched consistently 
with required institutional support for appropriate maintenance and management competencies, to 
ensure sustainability of investment; (b) the needs within the basin exceed the current scale of 
investments and therefore (i) investments need to be modelled, targeted and monitored to establish 
the most cost-effective interventions to improve basin health and green resilient growth that 
supports livelihood and maintains the sustainability of economic development; (ii) capacity and 
investments need to be leveraged from a variety of public and private partners; (c) problems related 
to water quality management, pollution control and urban upgrading are complex and require multi-
sectoral and integrated approaches; (d) both the institutional and environmental objectives 
associated with addressing such complex issues should be treated as long-term program goals rather 
than short-to medium-term project objectives; (e) integrated approaches to water quality 
management can enhance additional benefits and contribute to poverty alleviation; (f) participatory 
approach, though time-consuming, is essential for sustainability of project results as it ensures 
consensus building between all stakeholders in reaching agreement on project design and achieving 
institutional and policy reform and public support; and (g) ex-post monitoring of activities to collect 
evidence of costs and benefits help to enhance chances for successful replication. 
 
Specific best practices that will be examined for application of proposed project activities include: 
(a) strengthening of the current institutional architecture - River manager as leader of the party - 
River implementer as the mayor of the county - high level leading group for strategic orientation 
and guidance (the Great Lakes National Program Office (GLNPO in the USA); the Office of the 
Prime Minister Program for the Lake Balaton (Hungary); and the creation of the Commission and 
Secretariat of the Lake Balaton from above mentioned office); (b) strengthening of incentive 
mechanisms (direct and indirect payment fee mechanism in Biwa Lake (Japan); environmental fee 
on net revenue from chemical factories around Lake Toba (Indonesia); fee grid for water 
consumption in Lake Constance (Germany-Switzerland and Austria) and; the revolving polluter-
payer fee/subsidy mechanism of the Seine Normandy River Basin Agency (France)); (c) citizen 
participation and information disclosure - (Women Association for the Lake Balaton which 
pioneered the lake's protection in earlier 1990; the Lake Naivasha (home of Kenya??s flowers 
export) Riparian Association (LNRA) and Lake Naivasha Growers Group (LNGG)); (d) ensuring 
soundness of infrastructure design and its O&M sustainability (the Chesapeake Bay restoration 
program (USA); Lake Champlain basin program (USA/Canada); the Lake Balaton water quality and 
tourism program; and Danube Water Program); (e) integrated action plan to maximize impact of 
interventions (the Great Lakes restoration program; the lake Ponchartrain restoration plan 
(Louisiana); the Lake Balaton program). 
 
Note:   Proposed project activities have been selected based on the following criteria: (a) cost 
effectiveness - each sub-project should have economic/financial return; (b) sub-projects should not 
cause any negative social and environmental impacts that cannot be mitigated through proper design 
and contract execution; (c) sub-projects must be in compliance with government development plans; 
(d) all land used for construction purposes shall conform to general land utilization plans of the 


cities and / or townships and their annual land use plans; (e) proposed interventions should solve 
existing problems systematically rather than only solve part of the problem; and (f) sub-projects 
should have demonstration value.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 â��
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 â��
Forests OP/BP 4.36 â��
Pest Management OP 4.09 â��
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 â��
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 â��
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 â��
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 â��
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 â��
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 â��

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 263.80 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 113.80
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
 Total 263.80


























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC974

Project Name Poverty Alleviation and Agriculture Development Demonstration in Poor 
Areas Project (P133326)

Region EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC
Country China
Sector(s) Crops (30%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Animal production (20%), 

Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Agricultural extensi on and 
research (10%)

Theme(s) Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural 
policies and institutions (20%)

Lending Instrument Specific Investment Loan
Project ID P133326
Borrower(s) International Department, Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency State Council's Leading Group for Poverty Reduction(LGPR), Foreign 

Capital Project Management Center
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

28-May-2013

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

28-May-2013

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

20-Feb-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

20-Aug-2014

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
The Chinese Government has always made poverty reduction an important goal and task of national 
development and China’s success in reducing poverty has been remarkable, an achievement that is 
acknowledged worldwide.  In the mid-1980s, the Government started the development-oriented 
poverty reduction programs in rural areas. Subsequently, the Government formulated and 
implemented the Seven-year Priority Poverty Reduction Program (1994-2000) and the Outline for 
Poverty Reduction and Development of China’s Rural Areas (2001-2010). After three decades of 
successful poverty alleviation and strong economic growth that has lifted some 600 million people 
out of poverty, the rate of poverty reduction, however, is beginning to show signs of becoming less 

responsive to broad-based growth. In addition, with increasing rural-urban disparities and diverging 
living standards, the Government recognized that the number of remaining rural poor was likely to 
be underestimated and adjustments to the previous poverty reduction policy were needed to better 
understand the patters of the remaining rural poverty and to integrate traditional rural poverty 
reduction with rural-urban transformation and urbanization policies.  
 
Consequently, in 2011, the Government revised the rural poverty line from CNY1,196 (2009) to 
CNY2,300 (US$361) which increased the number of rural poor from 27 million in 2010 to 128 
million in 2011. In addition, the State Council’s Leading Group for Poverty Reduction and 
Development released the Outline for Development-oriented Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural 
Areas (2011-2020) to provide a new strategic direction for addressing rural poverty. The strategy 
complements the traditional geographical targeting of designated poverty counties with the concept 
of adjacent destitute mountain areas of which 14 are prioritized for comprehensive regional 
development investments. The new strategy aims to eliminate hunger and elementary needs by 
2020, achieve a growth rate in rural per-capita income in poor areas that is above the national 
average, and promote the convergence of human development indicators and public services 
coverage across rural and urban areas. To narrow the rural-urban gap, the strategy lays out a broad 
approach that includes rural industrialization based on comparative advantage, infrastructure 
development, relocation and village consolidation, rural-urban integration, comprehensive public 
service provision and expansion of household-based social protection programs, such as the 
minimum living allowance (dibao), rural pension, and healthcare, and education, family planning, 
and environmental management.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
The project is proposed to be implemented in Gansu, Sichuan, and Guizhou provinces.  The three 
provinces face the common challenge of persistent rural poverty in remote rural areas.  Many of the 
project areas are traditional semi-subsistence areas where the poverty rate ranges between 30 to 50 
percent.  Agriculture remains an important source of local employment and income but geographic 
and climatic conditions, labor migration, underinvestment, and underdeveloped infrastructure pose 
challenges to future agricultural development.  In all three provinces, a gradual restructuring of the 
agricultural sector is needed to allow productivity and farm income to increase and to overcome 
constraints to agriculture modernization.  
 
Gansu Province.  Project counties are situated in the Liupan Mountains of Gansu in northwestern 
China.  Project areas have comparative advantages in horticulture, and several counties have 
successfully developed advanced production and marketing bases for apple, pear, grapes, medicinal 
herbs, and potato.  Still, rural poverty is high, often above 40 percent.  Poverty appears not so much 
rooted in poor production potential but more in the dominance of enterprises in the horticulture 
sector which appear to capture a considerable share of revenue in the value-chain while relatively 
little value is reaching the household or farm level.  One of the challenges in Gansu under this 
project is to strengthen the institutional environment for smallholders through the promotion of 
effective farmer cooperative arrangements that allow farmers to participate effectively in the 
modernization of the sector and to benefit from the high-value agricultural production chains. 
 
Sichuan Province.  Project areas are located in the Wumeng and Wuliang Mountains of southern 
Sichuan.  They are characterized by high mountains, narrow and steep valleys, and very limited flat 
or terraced land for farming.  Per capita farmland is often less than half a mu or about 0.03 hectares.  
Altitudes within one county range from several hundred to over 4,000 meters above sea level and 


agro-climatic conditions vary widely.  Alpine meadows and shrublands are generally used of 
livestock grazing, often in unsustainable ways with visible degradation of vegetation and soils. At 
lower elevations, steep slopes and narrow valleys are used for cropping and erosion risk is high. 
 
Local communities belong nearly exclusively to the Yi Minority.  Yi language is used widely while 
only few people speak Mandarin Chinese in rural areas. Due to the remoteness of these areas, the 
unique cultural background of the population, as well as low education levels, communities are not 
well integrated into the mainstream society and labor mobility is limited as compared to other areas. 
Development opportunities are limited as well; and investments in public service expansion appear 
to be prohibitively expensive in many remote locations.   The development challenge in Sichuan is 
to identify and focus on those project areas with long-term development potential and to promote 
agricultural production systems that can generate income and are environmentally sustainable. 
Opportunities exist for producing and primary processing of higher value and niche-market 
products, such as walnuts, medicinal herbs, and fruits, and for restructuring the high altitude 
livestock sector to become environmentally and economically sustainable.  
 
Guizhou Province.  Guizhou Province is located in southwest China. Out of Guizhou’s total 
population of 40 million, 11.5 million live below the national poverty line. About 80 percent of the 
province belongs to the limestone and karst areas of the Wuling and Wumeng Mountains in which 
sixty-five poor counties and 85 percent of Guizhou’s poor are located.  These areas are 
characterized by relatively fertile but often shallow soils and are subject to severe water and soil 
erosion and management problems.  The unique geographic conditions and the limited availability 
of productive farmland, combined with inaccessibility and underdeveloped infrastructure, represent 
significant challenges to agricultural development.  Recent improvements in transportation 
infrastructure, both highways and village access roads, however, are providing potential 
opportunities to reach large urban markets in Chongqing and Guiyang.  These remain un-tapped to 
date because of the limited investment into the agricultural sector itself. For the future, modern 
agricultural production systems that build on: (a) more sustainable land use; (b) improvements of 
the organizational level of farmers, and (c) carefully designed land consolidation programs offer 
promising ways to overcome technology constraints, attract investment, and link agricultural value 
chains to urban markets.

Relationship to CAS
The project would support the CPS’ strategic theme two: promoting more inclusive development, 
by geographically focusing on lagging regions and small towns and by supporting policies and 
demonstration projects that address inequalities. It would contribute to the CPS outcome 2.3: 
enhancing opportunities in rural areas and small towns, by piloting new ways to boost rural incomes 
and reduce poverty under the umbrella of the new Poverty Reduction for China’s Rural Areas 
Strategy (2011-2020) and by promoting inclusive innovation to decrease disparities.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)

Key Results (From PCN)
The achievement of the Project Development Objective would be measured through the following 
key performance indicators, namely the:  
 
a)       The generation of incremental net value of agricultural production through project 
investments;  
b) The fair and equitable distribution of the net production value among the various  
stakeholders in the value chain; 
c)  Additional private sector investment leveraged through project investments; and  
d) Viability and sustainability of the project models and potential for up-scaling.  
 
Additional component-specific performance indicators as well as sector core indicators will be 
formulated and included into the results framework during project preparation

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
The proposed project seeks to assist the Government in developing models to advance the rural-
urban integration and rural sector modernization agenda in representative destitute rural and 
mountain areas.  The focus of the project would be on demonstrating approaches to rural income 
generation that are based on the modernization of selected agricultural sub-sectors and value-chain 
development, institutional farmer cooperative development, the provision of grant funds for poor 
farmer households and cooperatives to support their participation in agricultural value chains, and 
capacity building for rural households, cooperatives, enterprises, and local governments.   
 
The project would seek to achieve the development objective through the implementation of the 
following components and activities: 
 
Component 1: Integrated Value Chain Development.  The objective of this component would be to 
develop more efficient agricultural value chains focusing on 2 to 4 agricultural or rural pillar 
industries in each project county.  This would be achieved through the restructuring and 
modernization of the current production patterns and by supporting the enabling institutions in each 
pillar industry.  The modernization would aim at creating or supporting larger, economically more 
viable and long-term sustainable production arrangements, for example cooperatives, household 
groups, or enterprises, which are capable to use better technologies and can capture value added in 
the up-stream processing and marketing value chains.  The component would also support the 
establishment of socially acceptable models of cooperatives, household groups, company-farmer 
household, and company-farmer household-cooperative organizations through a business and 
market-based approach. 
 
Component 2: Public infrastructure and services support.  The objective of this component would be 
to improve public infrastructure and public services in order to enable and facilitate restructuring of 
the agricultural sub-sectors under Component 1.  The component would support investments in: (a) 
production road infrastructure; (b) irrigation and drainage, terracing, etc. (c) communications and 
information and telecommunications (ICT) infrastructure and equipment; and (d) public market 
facilities, electricity supply and other infrastructure necessary to facilitate and complement farmer 
and private investments.  In addition, the component would provide investment in other supporting 
public services, such as food safety testing and control, public extension and training services, 
marketing systems and agriculture research and technology transfer. 
 
Component 3: Rural and Agricultural Business Development Support.  The objective of this 
component would be to provide business development services to farmer households and 


cooperatives in support of the agriculture-value chain development under omponent 1.  Specific 
investments would include:  (a) a conditional grant program to poor households and households 
groups to encourage the self-organization of households and provide means for the purchasing of 
agricultural and other inputs to allow them to participate in new production arrangements; (b) 
training and mentoring for new and existing enterprises and cooperatives and for community-based 
economic groups in ethnic minority areas; (c) training for government officials on the roles of 
government and private sector and on how to built public-private partnership arrangements; in 
addition, training on appraisal guidelines for public sector support in rural areas; (d) technical 
assistance to value-chain operators; (e) policy studies on how to improve investment climate, good 
governance, and fair benefit-sharing in cooperative-enterprise arrangements; and (f) marketing 
studies for selected products, analytical studies related to poverty reduction and agricultural sector 
development, policy guidelines, and the development of appraisal guidelines for public sector 
support in rural areas.  
 
Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E).  The component would 
establish the project management and M&E system of the project and provide office equipment, 
transportation and technical assistance services. It would support the coordination between 
implementation agencies at all levels and with other government programs and institutions and the 
capture of implementation lessons from value chain development.  It would also include support to 
establishing and operatingthe project’s progress and impact M&E system.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  300.00 Total Bank Financing:  150.00
Total Cofinancing:  Financing Gap:  0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 150.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 150.00
 Total 300.00

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 1 of 14  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23298 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P163533  Odisha Integrated 
Irrigation Project for 
Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (P163533) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Nov 13, 2018 Jan 28, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Odisha Community Tank 
Development and 
Management Society 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective is to intensify and diversify agricultural production, enhance climate resilience and 
improve water productivity in selected cascades of Odisha. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 235.74 

Total Financing 235.74 

of which IBRD/IDA 164.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 164.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 71.74 

          Borrower 71.74 

   


 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Over the past ten years, India has seen strong economic growth - exceeding 7 percent per annum - driven primarily 
by robust private consumption, a resilient services sector, and a revival in some industrial activities. The reduced 
momentum in investment and exports notwithstanding, annual growth rates are still projected to average 7.5 percent per 
annum in coming years because of the diversity in the country’s drivers of growth and the vast scope for improvement in 
many areas.   

2. Alongside this growth, India has achieved significant progress in reducing extreme poverty - from 46 percent in 1993 
to 21 percent in 2011 (using the international poverty line of $1.90 per person per day in 2011 purchasing power parity). 
World Bank estimates point to continued reduction in poverty in more recent years, indicating that the country is on track 
to eliminating extreme poverty by 2030. Urban growth and rising labor earnings due to movement of labor from agriculture 
to non-farm work, an unprecedented rise in wages for unskilled labor, and demographic changes (e.g. a declining 
dependency ratio), underlie the rapid poverty decline.  

3. Over the past three decades, the economy has undergone a structural shift from agriculture as the dominant sector, 
to services and industry. Even then, agriculture continues to be essential for achieving India’s development goals, as the 
sector employs about 59 percent of the country’s total workforce, is a source of livelihood for 70 percent of India’s rural 
households, and is the main source of economic linkages in rural areas. In 2017, the sector contributed about 17 percent 
to the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP). While its contribution to the economy is likely to keep declining, agriculture 
will continue being the single largest contributor to employment and income of the rural population in the foreseeable 
future. 

4. Because of a complex web of policies and institutions that limit the performance of agricultural markets, diminishing 
returns to technologies that once sparked the green revolution, and suboptimal diversification among others, the 
agriculture sector continues to perform below its potential. Long-term agricultural growth has averaged about 3 percent 
per year1 and generally lags the growth rate for the larger economy. Sector growth is subject to large annual shocks, which 
as projected, are expected to be exacerbated by climate change. In addition, India’s agriculture has, for long, been based 
on an unsustainable resource-intensive model, predominantly characterized by inefficient use of water and land 
resources, and as an imperative, will have to shift to higher levels of resource use efficiency, given the country’s low per 
capita natural resource endowments2 and the projected impacts of climate change.  

                                            
1 With decelerating productivity growth of food grains. 
2 With annual per capita water availability of only about 1,000 m3, India is one of the most water-stressed countries in the world. 



     

5. Moving away from its long-running policy focus on raising agricultural output and improving food security, the 
Government of India has now prioritized the doubling of farmers’ incomes by 2022 and through a number of interventions 
e.g. the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) is also committed to accord high priority to improving water use 
efficiency - more crop per drop - in a focused manner3. 

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6.  Odisha ranks among the fastest growing economies in India, consistently growing at rates higher than the national 
average. Mirroring the national level, Odisha’s economic growth has been mainly driven by services (43.5 percent of GDP) 
and industry (36.6 percent of GDP). Between 2012 and 2017, per capita incomes in the State increased by 30 percent 
(from Rs. 47,632 to Rs. 61,678) and poverty reduced at an annual rate of 3.5 percent. Despite this good progress, Odisha’s 
per capita income still stands at only 75 percent of the national average.  

7. While Odisha’s economy has transformed from a predominantly agro-based economy, agriculture remains a key 
sector, providing employment and livelihoods to more than 62 percent of the State’s workforce, and contributing close to 
20 percent to its GDP. Indeed, a strong correlation exists between agriculture sector performance and overall state GDP, 
pointing to strong linkages between agriculture and other sectors. 

8. Like much of India, Odisha’s agriculture sector performance, relative to potential, is low. The officially reported 
compound annual average growth rate of 2.8 percent for the sector for the period 2011-17, is below the national average, 
and masks the highly volatile sector performance, which in reality is characterized by significant negative growth every 
alternative year. Consequently, because of low sector performance, Odisha ranks at the bottom in terms of annual farmer 
income (i.e. Rs. 16,884 per family), only outperforming West Bengal, where the average farmer income stands at Rs. 
11,748 per annum.4 

9. Among others, key constraints to the improved performance of Odisha’s agriculture sector include: (i) low 
productivity; (ii) limited diversification; (iii) high exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events; (iv) access to 
reliable irrigation; and (v) dysfunctional or non-existing value chains for important crops. First off, average yields for major 
crops in Odisha still lag both those in neighboring states with comparable factor endowments and the national averages 
(Table 1), and are far below their potential5.   

 Table 1. Average Yields, 2016-2017 

Crop  

------------------------------Crop Yields (ton/ha)------------------------------ 

Odisha 
Andra 

Pradesh 
Madhya 
Pradesh 

Telangana West Bengal 
India 

Paddy 1.49 3.47 1.75 2.91 2.89 2.40 
Pulses 0.55 0.30 0.94 0.77 0.97 0.79 
Wheat 1.33 na 2.98 1.40 2.68 3.20 
Potato 12.00 14.92 20.07 25.96 26.16 21.51 

10. According to the findings of a State-level NITI Aayog Task Force on Agriculture6, these low farm-level yields are 
largely due to limited adoption of productivity enhancing technologies (including the use of improved germplasm), a 

                                            
3 PMKSY seeks to achieve convergence of investments in irrigation at the field level, expand cultivable area under assured irrigation, improve 
on-farm water use efficiency, enhance adoption of precision-irrigation and other water saving technologies (more crop per drop), etc. 
4 National Sample Survey Organization, 2013.  Situation Assessment Survey of Agricultural Households, All India Debt and Investment & Land 
and Livestock Holdings in India (January – December 2013) 
5 World Bank. 2014. Republic of India: Accelerating Agricultural Productivity Growth. Washington, DC.   
6 Government of Odisha, 2016. Rejuvenation of Agriculture: Recommendations of State NITI Aayog Task Force. 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 5 of 14  

     

degrading natural resource base, inadequate and mostly unreliable irrigation7,8, and weaknesses in the extension system.  

11. Due to several factors9, Odisha’s progress with respect to diversification – an important vehicle for agricultural 
growth - has been mixed at best, even against a backdrop of real shifts in consumer demand towards more diversified 
food baskets. While the net area devoted to rice showed some reduction between 2006 and 2015, the latest year for 
which comprehensive data sets exist, the total area devoted to food grains has been increasing. In fact, according to the 
Odisha Economic Survey of 2017-18 example, the areas under spices, vegetables, fruits, and floriculture - a proxy for 
diversification - declined by 20 percent, 6 percent, 9 percent and 12 percent, respectively, between 2014 and 201710. 

12. In addition, extreme weather events, largely droughts, and to a lesser extent, floods and cyclones, also continue to 
undermine Odisha’s agriculture performance and have been the principal driver of the volatility in sector growth. Figure 
1 for example, shows percent annual growth in rice production-the major crop - over five decades, and attests to the 
vulnerability of the State’s agriculture to the debilitating impacts of extreme weather events, which seem to occur with 
almost predictable periodicity.   

Figure 1: Percent annual  growth in rice production, 1962-201411 

 

 

13. While Odisha has a long history with the menace of drought – going all the way to the drought of 186612 - recent 
trends point to an increasing frequency13 as well as more agricultural areas coming under the ambit of droughts. As 
pointed out in the Odisha Climate Change Action Plan, this trend will be further amplified in the future due to climate 

                                            
7 About 2/3 of the State’s gross cropped area is rain-fed and depends on monsoon – a vast reliance on nature in an environment with highly 
skewed annual rainfall availability.  
8 Of the total cultivable area of 8.7 million ha in the State, irrigation potential has been developed for 2.96 million ha in Kharif and 1.48 million 
ha in Rabi season.  
9 A comprehensive understanding of which will be developed during preparation. 
10 Government of Odisha, 2018: Odisha Economic Survey of 2017-18. 
11 Data source: Government of Odisha, Status of Agriculture in Odisha, 2014-2015.  
12 Reputed to have caused the death of one third of Odisha’s population due to famine. 
13 From 1 in 5 years to 1 in 2 years since 2009. 


change14. With 2/3 of its gross cropped area under rainfed production and an insignificant use of groundwater, the State 
has few and inadequate instruments to mitigate against climate change-induced weather vagaries.  

14. Moreover, even when Odisha has relatively more water resources than many States in India, Irrigation 
development is low and below the national average.  Of the total cultivated area of 8.7 million ha, only 1.9 million ha (21 
percent) is under irrigation. Only 34 percent of the total irrigation potential of 5.5 million ha has been developed and 
groundwater use is negligible. With limited irrigation development and seasonally skewed rainfall, Odisha is not making 
the most out of every drop of water. In fact, estimates indicate that about 40-50 percent of available rainfall is lost as non-
beneficial evapotranspiration, a loss higher than the neighboring states. In addition, many of the irrigation systems have 
become victim to a vicious cycle of the build-neglect-rebuild. Operation and Maintenance (O&M) is not conduced 
systematically as a result of insufficient funds, the quality of irrigation services degrades and further undermines farmers’ 
willingness and capacity to pay for services. Arrangements for irrigation management have not been adapted to the 
requirements of recent developments, including the use of groundwater, adoption of more individual irrigation 
technologies, and the need to adopt a cascade perspective on irrigation management. 

15. Furthermore, remunerative and reliable markets in Odisha, a precondition for sustained agricultural growth are 
limited, mainly due to poorly functioning value chains. For example, supply chains for otherwise high-value commodities 
(e.g. spices, vegetables) are fragmented and uncoordinated, often involving multiple layers of intermediaries in some 
places, and completely no players in many other places. 

16. The Government of Odisha (GoO) has identified increasing production and productivity, reducing the vulnerability 
of agriculture to climate change, diversification towards high-value crops, rainwater harvesting and improving efficiency 
of water use, improved produce marketing, and addressing absentee landlordism inter alia, as important issues to be 
addressed to improve the performance of the agricultural sector and raise farmer incomes. The proposed project 
contributes to these efforts. The proposal is to support higher agriculture growth, more efficient water use, better quality 
and reliability of irrigation service delivery, and strengthen the resilience to climate change of production systems in six 
districts (see Table 2) in Odisha.  

17. Characterized by highly skewed and variable rainfall patterns15, a lack of perennial rivers, these districts depend on 
a cycle of dry seasons alternating with increasingly uneven and erratic monsoons for water. On average, they suffer from 
marginal drought one in three to five years, moderate drought in six to eight years, and severe drought one in thirty years. 
Among other reasons, the undulating physiography and the predominantly small-sized land holdings limit the technically 
and economically efficient development of centralized major and medium irrigation systems (reservoirs and canals) to 
serve these areas and, they therefore, generally have comparatively lower irrigation coverage than other parts of the State 
(Table 2).  

    Table 2. Irrigation potential created as a ratio of cultivated land 

Project District Ratio of irrigation potential created to total cultivated area 
Kharif Rabi 

Ganjam 0.74 0.29 
Kandhamal 0.30 0.38 
Kalahandi 0.55 0.70 
Nuapada 0.42 0.58 
Mayurbhanji 0.55 1.15 
Keonjhar 0.37 0.51 

                                            
14 Climate projections indicate that drier areas will become drier and flood prone areas will be subject to more flooding. Other problems such 
as pest and disease outbreaks are also likely to increase due to climate change. 
15 When it rains, eighty six percent of the rains fall in the monsoon period (June-October), while the remaining 14 percent occurs during the 
other 7 months of the year, from November to May. 



State average 0.62 0.72 

 
18. The districts therefore, have historically relied on water, stored in cascades of impoundments (tanks) for agricultural 
production and as a buffer against droughts. The tanks support livelihoods of over 300,000 households, most of whom 
are in the poorest quintile. Besides sustaining agricultural livelihoods, the network of tanks in these areas also serves other 
important purposes such as controlling and reducing the impacts of floods - when they occur-and recharging the 
groundwater table. Investing in these districts will also help meet a key policy objective of the GoO to more evenly spread 
the benefits of irrigation - currently confined to a few districts in the form of major and medium irrigation projects16.   

19. Specifically, the project will support sustainable and resilient intensification, judicious diversification17 to high-value 
commodities (especially during the Rabi season and for some areas under upland rice in Kharif), improved produce 
marketing and also incentivize and improve the quality of irrigation service delivery and the reliability of water supply to 
ensure a more efficient, productive and equitable distribution of water to beneficiary farmers throughout the year that is 
more responsive to the more demanding higher value crops. The project builds on the successes of an earlier Bank-
financed Odisha Community Tanks Management Project in bridging the gap between the then existing irrigation potential 
and actual irrigation coverage of selected tanks and expands the engagement further into institutional reforms and 
capacity strengthening for improved system performance, diversification and marketing of farmer produce. 

 

Relationship to CPF 
 

20. The India CPF (2018-2022) argues that for the country to maintain its trajectory of high growth and poverty 
reduction, it must: (i) embrace much more efficient use of the country’s resources, particularly water and land and address 
the impacts of climate change; (ii) foster inclusiveness both for poverty reduction and as a key condition for sustaining 
high rates of economic growth; and (iii) strengthen the agility, performance and responsiveness of public sector 
institutions. One of the three CPF focus areas (Focus Area 1) proposed for Bank engagement is “resource efficient growth” 
where one of the Objectives is promotion of a more resource-efficient, inclusive and diversified growth in the rural sector. 
The proposed project dovetails and is consistent with Bank support (to include inter alia, support to sustainable 
productivity gains, CSA practices, diversification, investments in irrigation and drainage for improved water use efficiency, 
value chains etc.) that is envisaged under this Objective.  

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
21. The Project Development Objective is to intensify and diversify agricultural production, enhance climate resilience 
and improve water productivity in selected cascades of Odisha. Project beneficiaries include small and marginal farmers, 
Water Users’ Associations (Pani Panchayats), farmer producer organizations, and other agro-entrepreneurs. Targeted 
investments will be undertaken to address any gender gaps as well as benefit other vulnerable groups. 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

22. The project is expected to lead to increased average yields, increases in the range, volume and value of marketed 
agricultural output, more productive and efficient use of scarce water resources, a more reliable supply and a better 
quality of irrigation service delivery, and improvements in farmers’ capacity to adapt to climate change. Proposed key 
outcome level performance indicators include the following: (i) increase in productivity of selected agricultural 

                                            
16 Government of Odisha, 2013. State Agriculture Policy, Department of Agriculture, Bhubaneswar. 
17 Diversification in this context is defined as reducing the emphasis on food grains and increasing the share of high-value 
agriculture. This would be done taking cognizance of the overall country policy intent to shift rice production towards relatively 
more water abundant states like Odisha. 


commodities supported by the project (t/ha); (ii) farmers adopting improved agricultural technology (number); (iii) share 
of non-rice products in total production in project areas(percent); (iv) water users provided with new/improved irrigation 
and drainage services (number); (v) acreage under crops that are less water demanding (ha); (vi) productivity of water use 
(kg/m3), and (vii) number of direct project beneficiaries (disaggregated by gender).  

 
D. Concept Description 

 
23. Agricultural production system improvements (e.g. improving productivity, system resilience to climate change and 
resource use efficiency) and market development are known to reinforce each other and are therefore better pursued 
and accomplished together. The proposed project primarily seeks to improve and diversify farmer yields and production, 
improve water productivity and efficiency, build resilience to climate change risks, and improve market access for farmers 
who can generate a marketable surplus in selected districts in Odisha. Producing higher value and more diverse crops puts 
a high premium on the quality and reliability of irrigation service delivery, as they leave no room for water supply errors 
and the higher use of farm inputs significantly increases the stakes. Higher value horticulture crops generally use less 
water as compared to wheat, paddy, sugarcane and cotton. The conceptual framework underlying the proposed design 
therefore links efforts to promote adoption of CSA practices18, diversification and productivity increases, with 
improvements in incentives for technology adoption, quality of water service delivery and water resource management. 
The project will comprise three components as described below: 

Component 1: Climate-Smart Intensification and Diversification of Agriculture 

24. The objective of this component is to increase agricultural productivity, strengthen the capacity of organized farmer 
groups to cope or adapt to climate change stresses affecting crop production, and diversify production in Rabi in response 
to effective demand as expressed by pre-identified commercial off-takers or gleaned from other reliable market signals. 
Support under this component is proposed to be organized around two mutually inclusive, overlapping and reinforcing 
subcomponents. 

Subcomponent 1.1: Support to Improved Productivity and Resilience 

25. This subcomponent aims at supporting and incentivizing farmer adoption of technologies and practices that 
demonstrably deliver the triple-wins of increased productivity, improved resilience to climate shocks and reduced GHG 
emissions, as a co-benefit. The exact nature of technology support will be: (i) a function of the specificities of production 
environments and unique climate vulnerabilities19 in individual cascade; (ii) scaled to farmer capacities and endowments 
and (iii) based on the principles of response to market demand, good choice of improved germplasm, adequate plant 
nutrition, and effective pest and disease management. 

26. In this respect, project support is envisaged to go towards organizing farmers for technology transfer purposes (e.g. 
through farmer field schools), technology sourcing and demonstration, farmer training, improving availability and access 
to productivity enhancing and resilient germplasm by strengthening key segments in the State’s seed production and 
distribution system, and strengthening advisory service provision, currently plagued by weaknesses in the extension 
system - such as inadequate manpower and limited knowledge and skills.   

Subcomponent 1.2: Support to Diversification and Produce Marketing 

27. The objective of this subcomponent is twofold: (i) support farmers to reduce the current emphasis on food grains 

                                            
18 In this context, CSA practices are defined as practices that sustainably increase productivity and farmers’ income and build resilience to 
climate change, while reducing GHG emissions where possible and appropriate 
19 To be mapped for the target districts following approaches developed through a World Bank Non- Lending Technical Assistance to Support 
Implementation of Odisha State Climate Change Action Plan. 


(especially rice and wheat) while increasing the share of high-value agriculture (e.g. fruits, spices and vegetables) in their 
overall production structure; and (ii) improve produce marketing to increase incomes and reduce price risks associated 
with diversification. A successful shift in favor of more diversified production would not only generate faster productivity 
and superior incomes for targeted farmers, but will also result into improved nutrition security, help reduce the water 
footprint of paddy, foster biodiversity, and strengthen resilience of the production systems to climate change.  

28. Project support to diversification and improved marketing is proposed to follow productive alliance approaches, 
which bring together organized farmers, produce buyers, technical service providers and leverage private sector financing 
to address market imperfections and build competitive value chains for select commodities. In this respect, the project 
could provide funding for several activities, including but not limited to: (i) awareness creation of diversification among 
farmers; (ii) identification of competitive value chains; (iii) farmer experimentation with new crops and 
training/demonstration of relevant production technology; (iv) strengthening of farmers for collective action (including in 
production, aggregation, technology transfer, among others); (v) business plan development; and (vi) selected productive 
investments - as would be identified in the business plans. Project support to crop diversification will be based on 
agronomic/agro-ecological suitability, comparative advantage of specific cascades, and local, national or international 
market opportunities. To further diversify farmer income streams (a key adaptation strategy) and maximize the utility and 
productivity of water stored in the tanks, during preparation, the project will explore the feasibility of using the tanks for 
seasonal aquaculture.  

Component 2: Improving Access to Irrigation and Water Productivity  

29. Access to reliable irrigation is generally critical to enhancing crop productivity, building resilience to climate change, 
promoting diversification and access to markets. It is doubly important in the targeted project areas that are characterized 
by frequent droughts and highly variable rainfall availability. Bridging increasingly longer dry spells during Kharif and 
producing more demanding higher value and more diverse crops during Rabi when the stakes are higher and when there 
is no margin for water supply errors, puts a high premium on the quality of irrigation services.   

30. Among others, reliability of irrigation services and a more productive use of water resources in the project areas is 
weighed down by: (i) the poor condition of hydraulic assets- mainly due to deferred maintenance; (ii) limited knowledge 
and skills in water management - often inadequate to provide supplemental irrigation during Kharif season, and to cover 
water-stress conditions during Rabi; and (iii) weak arrangements for O&M. Additionally, most of the tank irrigation 
systems have been developed for rice cultivation and need to be adapted for a more diversified and more demanding 
cropping system.  

31. The proposed project aims to improve the performance of irrigation throughout the year and across cascades of 
selected tank irrigation systems through modernization of hydraulic assets, institutional reforms, and capacity 
strengthening. The objective is to use water more efficiently, reduce water losses and save water during Kharif season, 
and transfer these savings to Rabi season. Capacities for irrigation management (including the introduction of asset 
management) will be strengthened to provide higher quality services. In addition, the project will promote sustainable 
groundwater use to supplement scanty rainfall and mitigate increasing rainfall variability. Key outcome indicators include 
the productivity of water use ($/m3) and the number of water users provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage 
services (number). 

Subcomponent 2.1: Irrigation Modernization 

32. The project will invest in the modernization of hydraulic assets. To that end, a comprehensive water assessment will 
be conducted in the Project cascades to identify opportunities for reducing water losses and for transferring the savings 
to Rabi season. For each of these opportunities, the implications on downstream water use will be identified through 
preparation of a pre- and post-project cascade-wide water balance. Investments include strengthening of canal bunds, 
modernizing hydraulic canal structures, installation of field channels and sub-surface pressurized pipes, and developing 

groundwater extraction. The project will also help farmers access subsidies at central and state level for the promotion of 
pressurized irrigation at chak level. In line with GoO’s intention, where feasible, the project will finance investments 
through DBOTs on a Hybrid Annuity Basis. 

Subcomponent 2.2: Irrigation Management 

33. Crop diversification and intensification require a higher quality of irrigation service delivery to meet the 
requirements of more demanding crops. Traditional arrangements for irrigation management often lack the capacities 
and incentives to deliver these improved services. The project will pursue institutional reforms and pilot the use of private 
(publicly funded) operators that will be incentivized to deliver high performing irrigation and O&M services through DBOT 
contracts on a Hybrid Annuity basis – in conformity with GoO’s intentions.  

34. The Project will promote conjunctive management and sustainable use of both ground- and surface water resources 
by improving groundwater monitoring linking these with irrigation scheduling decisions. The Project will also establish a 
surface and groundwater monitoring and benchmarking system and will (i) link these data to decision making on irrigation 
scheduling, and (ii) significantly improve citizen engagement in the management of irrigation systems.  

35. The project will strengthen capacities of farmers and Pani Panchayats through Farmers’ Field Schools and 
demonstrations, among others in modern irrigation technologies, improving irrigation efficiency and rational hydraulic 
asset management. The project will also introduce the allocation of investment resources on the basis of scheme 
performance (including abidance by agreed water allocation, meeting efficiency targets and cost recovery). Capacities will 
also be strengthened to improve the management and maintenance of hydraulic assets. 

Component 3: Project Management 

36. This component will strengthen capacities for project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (including, 
inter alia, the areas of procurement and financial management) through the provision of goods, consultant services, 
training, and financing of incremental operating costs. This component will also develop a comprehensive management 
information and data collection and reporting system on key performance outputs and impact indicators through baseline 
surveys, participatory assessments, mid-term reviews and final evaluations. Staffing of the PMU will include a number of 
technical, financial management, M&E and safeguards (social and environmental) experts. Detailed implementation 
arrangements will be spelled out in the Project Operational Manual. (POM). Regular training of PMU staff will be organized 
to strengthen their capacities to implement the project. 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Odisha is located on the east coast of India along the Bay of the Bengal. The state has coastal line of about 450 km, and a 

geographical area of 155,707 sq. km which accounts for 4.87% of the total area of India. The state of Odisha can be 
divided into five agro-ecological zones: (1) The coastal plains, (2) The middle mountainous range – part of Eastern Ghats 
mountain range, (3) The rolling uplands, (4) river valleys, and (5) subdued plateaus. While the state has a wide network of 
river basins and sub-basins, it is mainly associated with 3 major river basins; Brahamani, Mahanadi and Vansadhara. 
Despite such diverse natural resource base, it’s agriculture sector has been performing well below its potential. Among 
key constraints to the improved performance of Odisha’s agriculture sector include: (i) low productivity; (ii) limited 
diversification; (iii) high exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events; and (iv) dysfunctional or non-existing 
value chains for important crops. 
  


To address these concerns, the project will invest on repair and rehabilitation of about 600 tanks spread across the state 
to revive small holder farming. The interventions will include: improving the efficiency of water assets, modernizing the 
irrigation systems, enhancing agriculture productivity, promoting adaptive agriculture practices, enhancing fishery 
production,  and promotion of climate friendly agri-business practices. 
  
 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Government of Odisha has recently completed a project of this nature, reflecting that the implementation capacity has 

already been established to address environment and social safeguard implications. The PMU is already in place, and the 
consultancy services for conducting ESMF, IPNM and TDP are already in place. Safeguard compliance tools needed are 
already available with the Government of Odisha to be used during the proposed project. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Gopalaswamy Srihari, Social Specialist 
Anupam Joshi, Environmental Specialist 
Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar, Environmental Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The physical investments under the project would 
include rehabilitation of existing water assets such as 
strengthening of canal bunds, modernizing hydraulic 
canal structures, installation of field channels, etc. 
where improper construction could result in adverse 
impacts. The investments under the climate resilient 
agriculture practices could result in positive impacts 
on the environment with effective planning and 
implementation. The project has been categorized as 
category B. There is no large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts envisaged due to the proposed 
project interventions. An Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) will be undertaken to identify 
environment and social issues of significance. Based 
on ESA, an Environmental and Social and Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared toadress the 
requirements of a category B project, to manage risks 
and maximize environmental and social opportunities. 
Both the ESA and ESMF will take into account 
experiences and lessons from the previous project. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No No impact is expected due to project interventions. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The rehabilitation and modernization of the tank 
system is likely to improve the water storage capacity 
and wetlands in the upper catchment. As the 
rehabilitation of tanks may impact natural resources 
including wetlands (if any). The ESA that  will help 
ascertain such impacts, and will develop a screening 
mechanisms that will help identify and avoid impacts 
on sensitive environmental habitats and important 
ecosystems. As details of the exact sites of the 
proposed investments are yet to be finalized, the 
ESMF would include all adequate measures for any 
negative effects on natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No No activities impacting on forests will be undertaken 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not directly finance pesticides, but 
improved irrigation efficiency and subsequent increase 
in crop productivity and diversification may induce 
pesticide use. The project will strictly use IPNM 
(Integrated Pest and Nutrition Management) 
approach. In addition, the ESMF will have a detailed 
local specific IPNM strategy for the project. This will 
reduce the reliance on chemical pesticides, include all 
measure for labour health and safety for pesticide 
application and usage, and guidance on training and 
demonstrations, that will be provided so that there is 
no significant adverse impact on the environment and 
public health. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No No impact is expected due to project interventions. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The state has a sizeable tribal population - 22.5% of 
the total population. In fact, Odisha is unique in having 
distinct tribal areas enshrined under the 5th Schedule 
of the Indian Constitution. At this stage, investment 
plans and locations are not known, and therefore, a 
Tribal Peoples Planning Framework (TPPF) will be 
prepared. Subsequently, sub-project specific Tribal 
Development Plans will be developed as and when 
sub-project locations are finalized. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The project does not anticipate any form of land 
acquisition or involuntary resettlement impacts as it 
would cover the existing  tank with a focus on repair 
and rehabilitation only. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 
No new dam construction will be  supported under the 
project. The project will rehabilitate and modernize 
the existing rainwater harvesting structures (known as 

Tanks and each having more than 40 Ha of command 
areas). Some of them would be having earthen 
embankments above 10 meters high, hence the 
project is triggered. 
This policy was triggered during the previous project, 
and a Dam Safety panel was put in place. The same 
Dam Safety panel will continue for this project under 
the technical guidance from the Chief Engineer, 
Central Designs Organization. The project will seek 
better coordination with the Dam Safety panel and 
support safety enhancement of the tank system as 
part of the tank rehabilitation. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
There is no evidence that the project would impact on 
any international water ways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Project areas do not fall in any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Mar 31, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The Borrower has already engaged consultants who shall commence preparation of the safeguards instruments soon. 

They shall undertake ESA to prepare Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Tribal Peoples Planning 
Framework (TPPF), Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) / Integrated Nutrient Management Plan (IPNM). These 
instruments are expected to be ready by March 31, 2019, or before appraisal and will be publically disclosed.  
The ESMF will provide essential baseline data, confirm policies that are triggered, assess likely impacts of the project 

interventions. The ESMF will also propose mitigation measures for any adverse impacts that may be envisaged through 
the design and construction phases of various interventions. Recommendations for strengthening institutional capacity, 
and estimate the budget required for the implementation will also be included. Assessments will be participatory with 
extensive consultations with all the stakeholders. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 1 of 21  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC21925 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Pakistan P163474  Khyber Pakhthunkhwa 
Irrigated Agriculture 
Improvement Project 
(P163474) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Oct 31, 2018 Feb 20, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan 

Department of Agriculture, 
Government of Khyber 
Pukhthukhwa, Department 
of Irrigation, Government of 
Khyber Pukhthunkhwa 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance water management, productivity and climate resilience of irrigated agriculture in project areas 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 183.00 

Total Financing 183.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 165.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 165.00 

          IDA Credit 165.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 18.00 



 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 3 of 21  

     

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 18.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

A - Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

  Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Pakistan, the world’s sixth most populous country, is a lower-middle-income country 
which has made significant progress towards macroeconomic and financial stability. Pakistan’s 
per capita income has almost doubled and the share of the population living in poverty has 
decreased by two-thirds over the last decade. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth reached 4.7 
percent in 2016 and is expected to reach 5 percent in 2017, supported by construction and 
manufacturing activities, increased private sector credit growth, increased reserves, low 
inflation, continuing strong remittances, and an upturn in foreign direct investment related to 
the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.  

2. Nevertheless, Pakistan faces serious development challenges, mostly in rural areas. 
GDP growth has been slower than needed to provide for the level of jobs required for a young 
and growing population. Inadequacy in the private sector environment, public sector 
management, and implementation capacity will continue to hamper service delivery 
performance. Thus, human development indicators continue to lag. In fact, Pakistan did not meet 
the targets of most of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. Rural poverty remains 
about double the urban poverty (35 percent versus 18 percent in 2014) and decreases less 
rapidly, given low growth of the agriculture sector, inadequate rural infrastructure and 
connectivity to markets, weak governance and institutions, and limited access to finance. 

3. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) has faced a number of crises in the past decade. With 
geographical proximity and community-level ties to Afghanistan, KP has suffered from the fallout 
of the conflict in Afghanistan, which has given rise to a precarious security situation as well as 
prolonged political and social instability. Related hostilities and extremist violence have caused 
far-reaching disruption to economic activity and inflicted extensive damage on private property, 
livelihoods, and public infrastructure.  


4. KP is also one of Pakistan’s less developed regions, with some economic and social 
development indicators lagging behind the national averages. The province of KP accounts for 
an estimated 10.5 percent of the country’s GDP and about 14.6 percent of the population 
(approximately 30.5 million). The per capita income in KP is estimated to be 33 percent below 
the national average, and despite a sharp and consistent decline in poverty, 27 percent of 
households are estimated to be living below the national poverty line. Another relevant indicator 
is the household size, which is strongly correlated with poverty in Pakistan. KP households 
comprise 7.2 members on average, well above the national average of 6.3 members. Most of 
KP’s population (85 percent) also lives in rural areas, where access to public services and income 
generation opportunities is lower than in urban centers. 

5. Climate change is expected to exacerbate extreme weather events in KP, thereby 
increasing the vulnerability of people and assets to climate induced disasters. Since 2010 
extreme events such as cloudburst over the catchment areas of Indus and its tributaries, have 
frequently occurred during the annual monsoon season. This often leads to flash floods and 
landslides, causing damages across several sectors, including agriculture, livelihoods, 
infrastructure, transport and communications, and housing. Since 2010, KP has been facing 
extreme precipitation events, in the Indus catchment areas, particularly during the annual 
monsoon season. This results in swelling of rivers, causing localized and major floods in low-lying 
areas. KP is also facing an increased number of glacial lake outburst floods (GLOF) due to 
increased temperatures and intense precipitation. Being an upper riparian province in Pakistan, 
KP receives the shortest lead times for early warnings on climate induced hydro-meteorological 
disasters. As a result of the 2010 floods, KP suffered US$ 1.1 billion in damages, which included 
damages and losses of US$ 96 million1 to the agriculture sector in the province. 

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Agriculture is important for Pakistan and the Government has placed agriculture 
development and water efficiency at the forefront of its development agenda. Agriculture2 
remains the second largest economic sector in Pakistan, contributing about 21 percent to the 
national GDP and employing approximately 42 percent of the labor force. The sector is also the 
largest contributor to export revenues with about 75 percent share from exports of primary and 
processed (mostly cotton textile) goods. The Government acknowledges that sustaining an 
annual GDP growth rate of 6 percent or more will require greater focus on agriculture and 
improved water resources planning, governance, and resilience. The Government is pursuing 
multiple initiatives to boost efforts to increase agricultural and water productivity, promote 
efficient use of its scarce water and precious land resources, and incentivize private sector 
investment in these areas for economic growth and shared prosperity.  

7. The contribution of agriculture in the KP economy, however, is less prominent, although 
it employs a high percentage of its labor force. KP’s contribution to the country agriculture GDP 

 

is the smallest of all provinces at 7 percent, compared to its share in total GDP of 11 percent. Also 
within KP, agriculture accounts for only 14 percent of the provincial GDP, representing the 
smallest share of all provinces. The sector accounts for 37 percent of labor force employment3 
and 11 percent of the total household income. The total cultivated area of the province is 1.6 
million ha (7 percent of the country’s total), half of which is rain fed. It produces about 5 percent 
of the country’s total wheat, 2 percent of rice, 17 percent of maize, 8 percent of sugarcane, 16 
percent of barley, 4 percent of gram, 3 percent of rapeseed and mustard, and 75 percent of 
tobacco. Its share in the country’s total livestock population is about 6 percent in cattle, 2.5 
percent in buffalo, 2 percent in sheep, and 8 percent in goats. KP is currently facing a food deficit 
and depends heavily on imports from other provinces, especially from Punjab, for important 
commodities like wheat (64 percent), rice (74 percent), milk, meat, sugar (80 percent), and 
vegetables (90 percent) to complement its production. The answer to this conundrum of 
agriculture may lie in the under exploitation of its natural resources, as the sector grew at a 
decent rate of 3.1 percent to 7.3 percent in the 2010–2015 five-year period, especially after the 
active insurgency period ended. 

8. KP’s land and water resources are under exploited. Of the total culturable4 land of 2 m 
ha., 1/3rd is irrigated, 1/3rd is rainfed and 1/3rd is culturable waste. Water allocated to KP under 
the National Water Apportionment Accord (WAA) of 1991 is 8.78 million acre feet (MAF) but due 
to current carrying capacity of the aging infrastructure and lack of new infrastructure the 
province is only able to withdraw about 68 percent (5.97 MAF) of its share. Also, 14 percent in 
floodwater, under the accord, is not fully used. Additionally, all water resources freed up from 
the WAA’s ambit, for the province, are not yet fully used. These include waters from schemes not 
exceeding 5,000 acres above elevation of 1200 ft. (Survey of Pakistan Datum [SPD]) and waters 
from Kurum/Gomal/kohat basins located in the highly-underserved areas of Kohat, Hangu, Karak, 
Bannu, Lakki Marwat, and D.I. Khan Districts. Thus, one-third of KP’s arable land depends on 
rainfall in a climate that is semiarid to arid. Another one-third (1.08 million ha) of KP’s arable 
land, called culturable waste land, is out of cultivation due either to water logging, non-
availability of irrigation water, salinity, unlevel land, lack of manpower, funds shortages, and so 
on. Thus, more land and water resource development is desperately needed for KP’s food 
security, import substitution, and economic development especially of the lagging areas. That’s 
why feasibility studies are included in the project design to prepare future investments in water 
resources development. 

9. The irrigation infrastructure in KP suffers from deferred maintenance5. KP canals are 
aging. Some are older than 100 years. As an upper riparian province with hilly terrains and steep 
slopes, KP’s canals suffer from frequent bank breaches, bed erosion and scouring due to floods, 

 
3 28 percent of male and 77 percent of female (mostly rural); 44 percent of rural and 6 percent of urban labor force is engaged 
in agriculture. The labor force participation is 80 percent male and 20 percent female (21 percent in rural and 12 percent in 
urban areas). 
4 According to bureau of statistics-Pakistan, culturable land includes cultivated and culturable waste lands and 

cultivated area includes rainfed and irrigated lands. 
5 De-siltation; oiling & greasing; repairing leakages, damaged sections of canal prism, cross drainage structure and outlets 



sliding and high velocities in addition to the normal wear and tear of a canal. Due to the poor 
condition of the canals, the system’s delivery performance is poor and the leakages/wastages 
(estimated at 25%) are causing water logging. Unlike Punjab, the reliance on ground water is 
minimal in irrigated areas, therefore water lost would be wasted and even would cause water 
logging and salinity. The silt deposition raises the level of the command area for which canal bed 
needs to be raised to continue providing the required volumes of water. 

Besides the canals, there are some 4,000-km long surface and subsurface drainage system in KP 
that was built to flush out the excess water to keep the fertile land in production in the central 
districts. However due to lack of funds, this infrastructure is also suffering and, the carrying 
capacity of the drainage system has diminished and large tracts of precious fertile lands are 
becoming water logged and saline again.  

To keep pace with the exceptional level of O & M needs of the KP irrigation and drainage system, 
larger amounts of funds are needed. However, according to the KP Irrigation Department, only 
1/3rd (PkR 500 m vs PkR. 12,00 m for the last 10 years) of the needs are provided. Water charges 
(Abiana) collections in the province has been low at 30% of the total assessed, mainly because of 
the limited paying capacity of the large number of small landholders and low flat rates - PKR 
300/year/acre. Besides, its own system, the department also must, at times, shoulder the 
rehabilitation of civil canals which are community owned and do not pay any water charges. 

This practice of ‘build neglect rebuild’ costs the exchequer dearly6 which are oftentimes met from 
the development budget. 

Removing this backlog of rehabilitation as well as modernization is important to improve the 
system service capability, reduce water wastages/leakages and water logging and safeguard the 
system sustainability.  

10. In KP, as reported by the Irrigation Department, 10-15 percent of the canal outlets are 
tampered and /or illegal. This creates in-equity among growers in the system and affects the 
productivity of the farmers mainly at the tail end. An understanding has been reached with the 
Department to resolve such in-equities during the rehabilitation of the system. 

11. Historically, the collaboration between Irrigation and Agriculture Departments, in KP, is 
weak. Irrigation Department is responsible for development of dams, canals and drains, its 
functionality and O&M; delivering water to farmers at the outlet/farmgate (in watercourses); and 
assessment and collections of water charges. The Agriculture Department is responsible for 
development and rehabilitation of watercourses, promoting water conservation technologies 
and training farmers in good agriculture practices. Due to poor coordination, the benefits of up 
and down stream investment do not consolidate at the farm level. The Baizai Irrigation scheme 
is a good example. The Irrigation Department constructed the upstream delivery system with 
capacity for 25,000 acres but since no provision was made in the scheme budget for the 

 
6 According to a global estimate, a dollar deferred maintenance costs US$7 in repair/rehabilitation 


construction of watercourses, the agriculture department could not do so and after more than 2 
years the farmers are unable to utilize the water fully. This collaboration has started to improve 
in some very new schemes and this project will contribute to improving this collaboration further. 

12. In KP, as in the rest of the country, O & M of the watercourses, that brings water from 
canals to the farms, is a challenge on the daily basis. These are earthen structures owned and 
managed by farmers. The average length of a watercourse (including branches) is about 3 km, 
serving an average area of 150 acres with an average number of 75 shareholder farmers. Every 
farmer has a turn, once a week, to take his share in proportion to his landholding from the 
watercourse. Every time a farmer diverts his/her share, loose earth/mud and stone mixture are 
gathered from the surrounding fields to plug and unplug the farm gate and watercourse at the 
turnouts. Preventing leakage from these structure is a continuous battle for the farmer. Since 
this channel must pass near each farm, there are many turns and branches through which water 
passes. This is an important cause of spillage and leakage for water. Being earthen, many 
different weeds/shrubs/trees start growing on the banks of the watercourse. These often 
become a source of blockage due to its own biomass and capturing silt load causing the water to 
overflow and causing ponding near the watercourse-sometimes becoming mosquito breading 
points. Another source of damage are rodents and grazing animals. This necessitates recurrent 
seasonal cleaning by farmers. Since farmers are poor and cannot afford to hire labour, they do it 
mostly themselves. This O & M of the watercourse draws heavily on the farmers’ time and labour 
-and also cause wastage of his precious water estimated up to 40%. Being earthen, it is easier to 
cut and steal other farmer’s share that can become source of heavy rifts in relations. Therefore, 
it is important to support farmer with watercourse improvement i.e. lining of 507% length, 
installing all turnout structures, construction of crossing culverts, washing pads, and animal 
drinking wallows. It is estimated that this investment helps the farmer save 75% labour time, 15 
percentage point of water wastage, water travel time by 50%, in-equity, theft control which 
results in 15-20% crop yield increase, 30% cropping intensity and ultimately increased net 
incomes. In addition to these benefits it also helps in saving energy costs and precious ground 
water on tube-well water courses. 

13. Field application of water is highly in-efficient in KP as in other parts of the country. Due 
to the widespread practice of flood irrigation and insufficient knowledge of good irrigation 
agronomy practices, water losses are highest at the field level where application efficiency is as 
low as 65–70 percent. Resultantly, crop yields and cropping intensities are low. Investments to 
promote water conservation technologies such as high-efficiency irrigation systems (HEIS) and 
laser-based precision land leveling (PLL) on-farm are of paramount importance for saving losses 
on-farm. HEIS is estimated to increase field application efficiency by 25 percentage points to 95% 
and PLL helps save water by about 30% resulting in increased yields and incomes. 

14. In KP, farmers’ productivity is generally low. Most crop yields in KP are low compared to 
other provinces and progressive growers. This could be attributed to large number of (80%) small 

 
7 So far the department lined 30% but the new findings and demand from the farmers suggest to increase it to 50% 



landholdings lacking scale and purchasing power; labour shortage due to out migration to cities 
and abroad and insufficient mechanization to off-set this shortage; shortage of skilled labour; 
insufficient private sector participation and services; lack of financial services; weak public sector 
research and extension services. 

15. KP has pockets with unique agro-climatic conditions, ideal for horticulture production. 
These include, among others, citrus, dates, pome fruits, potato, tomato, and onions. However, 
the current share of the subsector in the total cropped area is only 6 percent. With improved 
access roads to the main domestic markets and neighboring Afghanistan and air links to the Gulf 
and Central Asian countries, KP could potentially further capitalize on this comparative 
advantage.  

16. Postharvest losses are high. Lack of postharvest technology and management and 
modern cool chain infrastructure and inappropriate storage, packaging, and transportation 
facilities are major bottlenecks specially for perishable commodities in KP. Postharvest losses of 
35 percent to 40 percent for fruits and vegetables remain one of the most pressing problems, 
mostly given the lack of farmer’s awareness about scientific handling of farm produce. 
Inappropriate storage facilities, both in the public and private sector, register the highest losses 
during handling operations. Horticulture products are mostly stored in shallow pits covered with 
farm wastes without ventilation, without proper sanitation, and without preventive measures for 
insect and disease control. The concept of a cool chain network is in its infancy and integrated 
cool chain networks are mostly lacking. The existing cold storage facilities are unevenly 
distributed across the country with Punjab dominating with 512 units, while KP only had 16 units 
in 2009 (Planning Commission 2009). The cold storage facilities are based on old technology that 
do not differentiate for unique temperature requirements of crop species. Moreover, most of 
the existing packing facilities do not measure up to international standards. The types of 
containers used for transporting and storing products vary from place to place, but a common 
practice is to use whatever container is available. This causes the produce to be pressed hard in 
the crates or carried in oversized containers, causing huge loss.  

17. In addition, the agricultural marketing infrastructure and system is inadequate and 
lacks market responsiveness. Many wholesale markets (mandis) were built years ago, and are 
unable to cope efficiently with increased transactions. Serious traffic congestion, insufficient 
space for efficient movement of products in and out, inadequate storage, and improper 
management are some of the major factors for increased marketing costs and physical losses of 
farm products. Hygiene conditions, particularly in the case of fruits, vegetables, and livestock, are 
quite dismal. Excessive domination of commission agents, lack of physical and allied facilities, 
non-involvement of growers and consumers in market committees, and an ineffective market 
information system are some of the inherent problems of these markets and are putting farmers 
at a disadvantageous situation while selling their produce. In addition, the lack of planning and 
communication between demand and supply result in gluts at one time and shortages at other 
times, causing severe price fluctuations and loss of farmer incomes.  



18. The level of processing and value addition of agricultural products is very low in 
Pakistan. Only 3 percent of the total production of fruits and vegetable and less than 10 percent 
of milk are processed in the country (Planning Commission 2009). There exists enormous 
potential of adding value to various fruits and vegetable, such as freezing, drying, dehydrating, 
or crushing into powder, juice, pulp, oil, paste, sauce, chips, pickles, chutney, and jam. The culture 
of value addition through processing and diversification is still at infant stages in Pakistan. This 
small amount of processing leaves large opportunities and could also absorb some of the 
seasonal glut and extend the life of the raw material. 

19. The new government has increased the budget allocation to the sector and shifted its 
policy from higher productivity to higher profitability for smallholder farmers. The KP 
Government increased the budget for its annual development plans to US$62 million for 
agriculture and US$71 million for irrigation in FY17, which is still well below the needs. Key 
priority areas of the new government, as highlighted in the KP Integrated Development Strategy 
of 2014–18 and the KP Agriculture Policy and Strategy—a ten-year perspective (2014–24), are 
improving, among others, production, processing, and marketing, thus improving extension 
services; diversification into high-value agriculture (horticulture, livestock, dairy, and 
aquaculture); adaptation to climate change; on-farm water management (OFWM); development 
of new water resources; rehabilitation/modernization of the existing irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure; and governance. 

20. The World Bank’s last engagement with KP in the sector was for about six years from 
2001 to 2007 for a total of US$21 million made mainly in restoration/rehabilitation of the 
irrigation network from the secondary to the tertiary level. Major efforts were also made, in 
support of the national drainage program (NDP), in devolving the management to farmers, with 
powers to collect water charges and keep 40 percent for managing the operation and 
maintenance of the system from the secondary level downward. However, this outcome could 
not be sustained for long and has been rolled back by the Government. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

21. To enhance water management, productivity and climate resilience of irrigated 
agriculture in project areas. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

22. The project outcomes will be measured with the following indicators: 

a) Area provided with improved irrigation and drainage services; 

b) Increase in agriculture productivity (yield); 

c) Increase in areas cultivated for High-Value Agriculture; 

d) Area under climate-resilient technologies and practices (resilience); 

e) Total number of project beneficiaries (including number of female beneficiaries) 


D. Concept Description 

23. The project will contribute to the development of the agriculture sector by working on (a) 
water as an important input and limiting factor to productivity and overall production (b) training 
and technology for improving productivity, post-harvest management and value addition. More 
specifically, it will support six key priority areas of the government strategy for the sector, that 
is, improving performance/functionality of the delivery system and reducing water wastages; 
making water allocation/distribution equitable; increasing financial sustainability of the irrigation 
system management; increasing climate resilience; increasing productivity and promoting high 
value agriculture (production, processing and marketing); and strengthening the department for 
improved service delivery and governance.  

24. To consolidate the benefits of the project, priority will be given to schemes where all the 
three components’ interventions can happen together. In this way, the two departments of 
agriculture and irrigation will work in close collaboration, hitherto weak.  

25. The project will provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (a) adaptation, by changing 
irrigation management systems and practices to reduce vulnerability to climate change, by 
reducing water wastages and its negative externalities during delivery and by reducing losses 
during field application and crop growth stages; and by promoting innovative resource 
management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use of crops and crop 
mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of protected 
agriculture and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (b) mitigation, by promoting sustainable 
water management practices that promote water use efficiency and by promoting agricultural 
intensification using higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and cropping 
patterns, and replacing traditional sources of energy. 

26. Woman will be particularly encouraged and targeted to derive maximum benefits of the 
project and play role in the implementation of the project. The project will also ensure to 
safeguard the interest and needs of woman and marginalized groups e.g. providing for protected 
washing pads and animal drinking willows, and avoiding technologies and practices that increases 
drudgery for woman. Further, contractors, consulting firms and implementing partners of the 
project will be sensitized on gender issues and encouraged to achieve gender balance in their 
teams. The operational manual will spell out gender aspects and protocols for mainstreaming 
gender within project interventions.  

27. The project will be open to the entire province and will be completed in six years. The 
project will have the following components: 

Component A: Irrigation System Management (IDA $52 m US) 

This component will have the following three sub-components. 



28. Sub-compoenent-A1: Rehabilitation and reduction in in-equities: This sub-component 
would support the Irrigation Department to overcome the backlog of rehabilitation to fully 
restore the functionality/performance of the irrigation system; reduce the excessive and wasteful 
losses estimated at 25% by 7 percentage points; and increase economic/service life by at least 
10-15 years. This will include support to both the government and civil (community owned) 
canals systems. The government has prepared a prioritized list of 22 schemes, costing about 
USD140 million, for rehabilitation. The project, during the preparation, will conduct a diagnosis 
of the KP irrigation system, including the list provided by the government to, identify the schemes 
to be support by the project. The criteria for selection would include: vulnerability to climate 
change impacts; acreage and number of beneficiaries; potential for high value agriculture; 
poverty levels in the area served; and cost effectiveness (cost per unit area served). A Project 
Preparation Facility (PPF) has been discussed with the client for preparing detail designs and 
bidding documents for the selected schemes. The rehabilitation works would, usually, include 
flood eroded beds and banks; sunken earth filled sections; and damaged hydraulic structures like 
100ft up and down stream of the fall structures, off-taking points of minors and sub-minors, 
footings of overhead bridges; passages through settlements and deep cut areas; and catchwater 
drains for flushing flood water. Before rehabilitation work begins, any outlets tampered and/or 
illegally installed will be removed. 

29. Sub-component-A2: Institutional strengthening & Reform: To avoid buildup of further 
backlog, an understanding with the GoKP will be developed to increase allocation of recurrent 
budget for the O&M of the system by lifting the current cap that is in place for the last 10 years. 
This could be informed by conducting a study on the cost of neglecting (under funding) the O&M 
of the system. However, to make it sustainable in the long run, support will be provided to the 
department to improve its revenue generation capacity by improving collection of the water 
charges. The investments of component C, should help increase the farmers’ capacity to pay 
water charges by improving their crop productivity and switching to high value crops.  

Further support will be provided for training of staff; developing asset management plan; and 
developing water budgets and water balances estimates for the six-major government canal 
systems.  

The KP government has planned to develop the Provincial Integrated Water Resources 
Management Policy with support from the Bank managed MDTF funded Governance and Policy 
Support project. Support under this sub-component will be re-aligned with the directives of this 
policy.  

30. Sub-compoenent-A3: Future investments preparation: To increase availability of water for 
irrigation, households and livestock; support ground water recharge; reduce intensity of floods, 
siltation downstream by tapping hill torrents and splash floods in the rainfed areas, the project 
will finance preparation of feasibilities, detailed designs, and bidding documents for selected 
dams and irrigation schemes. The scheme selection will be based on criteria of number of farmers 
and acreage benefiting and cost effectiveness and poverty levels in the area served. 


Component B: On-farm Water Management (IDA $51 m US) 
This component will enable the Agriculture Department to support farmers including woman, to 
rehabilitate/improve existing and construct new watercourses; adopt water conservation 
technologies on their farms; and in training its staff. The component design benefits from lessons 
drawn from Sindh and Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Improvement projects. These include a) 
developing good database of watercourses with information for length, no. of shareholders, legal 
status; inclusion of tube-well watercourse; lining 50% length and all turnouts; seasonal work 
windows; monitoring dashboards; estimation of average costs; openness to the entire province 
b) empowerment of the farmers to select and negotiate price of the HEIS and PLL equipements 
with suppliers; training of farmers in crop agronomy; fixing maximum cap on project support per 
unit, c) ensuring geographical spread for laser land leveling promotion etc. The component will 
also finance the extended presence of consultants/firm for engineering supervision of activities 
to be implemented by the field teams of the Department. This component will have the four sub-
components, as follows; 
31. Sub-component-B1: Rehabilitation of existing watercourses: The rehabilitation/improvement 
works will be done on existing watercourses on government and civil canals; springs and tube-
well irrigated areas. This work will include lining of 50% length from the offtake point including 
selected critical sections; alignment; desilting; re-sectioning; installing all turn out structures; 
crossing culverts, washing pads and animal drinking willows. Farmers will contribute 20% of the 
total cost in the shape of skilled and unskilled labour and form themselves into water users’ 
associations with at least 70% farmers’ representation.  

32. Sub-component-B2: Construction of watercourses network: Construction of new 
watercourses network will be done in some new schemes areas where the Irrigation Department 
has already completed the upstream irrigation infrastructure but not the watercourses due to 
which farmers are unable to utilize water. The project support will include farmer’s mobilization 
and their formation of WUAs; engineering design, BOQ & cost estimates for construction of the 
full length of earthen watercourse; lining of 50% length preferably from the off-taking point and 
other critical sections; construction of all turn out structures, crossing culverts, washing pads and 
animal drinking points. Here again farmers will contribute 20% of the total cost in the shape of 
skilled and unskilled labour and form themselves into a water users’ association where at least 
70% farmers become members. 

33. Sub-component-B3: Promote water conservation technologies: To promote on-farm 
water conservation, technologies like HEIS and precision laser land leveling (PLL) will be 
supported on a cost sharing basis. These technologies will particularly suit at the tail end and 
tube-well irrigated areas. Farmers will be trained in growing high value crops under HEIS to make 
the use of technology economically viable. 

34. Sub-component-B4: Capacity building & institutional strengthening: The project will 
finance training of staff in new improved methods of on-farm water management and data and 
studies on the watercourses network. 


Component C: Agriculture Productivity Enhancement and Value-Addition (IDA 
$50 m US)  
The objective of this component is to improve the productivity, diversification, harvest and post- 
harvest management and processing & value addition in agriculture (crops, horticulture, fisheries 
and livestock sub-sectors). This objective will be achieved by i) strengthening public sector 
institutions (e.g., research and extension institutions) to solidify the foundation for sustained 
sectoral growth; i) investing in capacity building and iii) introducing modern technologies to 
farmers; and iv) support agribusinesses/ag-entrepreneurs for higher value addition through agro-
processing and commercialization services. This component addresses the climate change 
vulnerabilities to the agriculture sector, as set out in the project’s vulnerability context. All the 
activities under the Component will adequately reflect important CSA areas of productivity, 
adaptation and mitigation as highlighted in Pakistan CSA profile important for agriculture in 
Northern Pakistan. Considering that more than 70% of Pakistan’s female workforce is employed 
in agriculture, there is a special need to ensure all services provided by the Component will be 
more gender sensitive. The lessons drawn from similar projects, for example, the Sindh 
Agriculture Growth Project, have been incorporated to the Component design. The component 
will also finance the extended presence of technical consultants/firm to assist with planning and 
management of the Component. 

35. Subcomponent C.1: Modernizing public extension service and agricultural research (US$14 m). 
The sub-component will finance modernizing and rehabilitating extension and research facilities 
which have been identified as critical for the KP agriculture sector, such as the agricultural 
research centers, training centers and laboratory facilities etc. The subcomponent will also 
finance information and communication (ICT)-based technologies and services for delivery of 
agricultural extension and marketing for farmers and value chains, such as developing mobile 
phone APPs and other ICT tools (e.g., 24/7 call center, interactive websites, mobile training and 
demonstration centers etc.). The subcomponent will also support studies and data on the sector 
and training of staff. 

36. Subcomponent C.2: Capacity building of farmers (US$6 million).  The project will finance 
training and capacity building for famers, which will be based on training needs assessment 
carried out by the departments and their technical assistance providers. Training topics will 
include, but not limited to, good agricultural practices (including those specifically related to 
CSA), agribusiness management, negotiating in the market, basic accounting, and business plan 
development skills, etc. This will be done through demonstration plots, public information 
campaign, face-to-face training (farmers field school), domestic study tours and exposure visits 
etc.  Special attention will be given to climate smart agriculture related knowledge.    

37. Subcomponent C.3: Introducing modern technologies to farmers (US$20 million).  The project 
will finance investments to increase productivity, climate resilience and on-farm pre-and post-
harvest management of crops, horticulture, fisheries and livestock sub-sectors through 
technology (e.g., farm machinery, equipements, seeds, breeds, and infrastructure etc.).  This 



support will be provided on a cost sharing basis with 70% paid by the Project and 30% by 
beneficiaries on a first come first serve basis, with ensuring regional equity. 

38. Subcomponent C.4: Support agribusinesses (US$10 million). This sub-component will support 
agribusinesses (SMEs)/agro-entrepreneurs for improved services, commercialization and 
processing & value addition. This will include businesses like seed companies, nursery growers, 
fish hatcheries, animal semen producers, farm machinery & equipements providers; reefer 
transporters, chillers, ventilated & cold storages, pack-houses including graders, sorter; slaughter 
houses, pulpers, oil extractors, de-hydrators, tanners; trading centers like rehabilitation of fruit, 
vegetable, livestock and grain wholesale markets; introducing digital trading platforms and 
contract growing etc. The project will provide a competitive grant program with a transparent 
and efficient review and selection process. The grant size will be up to US$100,000, with 30% 
matching fund from applicants. The grant will be released in three tranches based on verified 
progress of proposal implementation. 

39. The component will provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (a) adaptation, by 
promoting innovative resource management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use 
of crops and crop mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of 
protected agriculture and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (b) mitigation, by promoting 
agricultural intensification using higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and 
cropping patterns, and replacing traditional sources of energy.. 

Component D: Project Management and Implementation Support (IDA US$12 
million) 

40. This component will support the establishment of the project management structure. This 
will include project administration, human resources including woman staff, procurement, and 
financial management; monitoring and evaluation (M&E); communications management; social 
and environmental safeguards management; and grievance redress and community feedback 
mechanisms particularly channeling the voices of woman beneficiaries.  

41. Citizen Engagement (CE): The populations targeted in the citizen engagement mechanism 
of the proposed project will be farmers and agribusiness owners receiving support to increase 
their yield/productivity and the commercialization of their products. The CE mechanism will 
assist the extension service and government officials in making more informed decisions about 
resource allocations, training and technology needs of farmers and agribusiness owners. Overall, 
the CE mechanism will enhance the successful implementation of the project, and guide the 
government in preparing better programs for farmers. A detailed citizen engagement mechanism 
and grievance redressal mechanism will be elaborated during the preparation phase of the 
project, and will be included in the project implementation manual. 

42. Gender. The project design and approach will reflect the need for taking account of the 
gender dimension and risks associated with knowledge and technology transfer. Project will be 
designed to ensure that it provides equal opportunities for women to participate in project 



activities. Climate-resilient agricultural technologies will be screened to ensure that they are 
gender-neutral. A comprehensive social assessment has been initiated as part of project 
preparation and is expected to result, among others, in a Gender Action Plan. 

   

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be implemented in various districts of KP. The land cover of KP changes from north to south. The 

Province sits primarily on the Iranian plateau and comprises the junction where the slopes of the Hindu Kush mountains 
on the Eurasian plate give way to the Indus-watered hills approaching South Asia. Geographically, the province could be 
divided into four agro-ecological zones on the basis climatic conditions covering temperature, rainfall, altitude and 
topography as developed by Environmental Protection Agency of KP:  
(a) Zone A – Northern Mountains covering districts of Buner, Shangla, Upper and Lower Dir, Swat and Chitral.  
(b) Zone B – Sub Humid Mountain covering districts of Haripur, Batagram, Mansehra, Abbottabad, Kohistan and 

Torghar.    
(c) Zone C – Central Valley Plains covering districts of Peshawar, Mardan, Charshada and Nowshera. 
(d) Zone D – Piedmont Plains (including Suleiman) covering districts of Bannu, karak, Lakki Marwat, Tank and DI Khan.  
The snowcapped mountains of Chitral and Swat have low vegetative cover above 4,000 meters. Mountains having 

altitude less than 4,000 meters have alpine forests (up to 3,300 meters). Altitudes between 3,000 meters to 1,500 meters 
have conifer and between 1,500 up to 900 meters have sub-tropical forests. These forests and plains provide habitat to 
98 species of mammals and birds including endangered species of snow leopard, brown bear, ibex, etc. The protected 
areas notified in KP includes 6 national parks, three wildlife sanctuaries, 38 game reserves, 90 community game reserves, 
16 private game reserves, 2 wildlife refuges and 8 wildlife parks. The combined area of all protected areas is 666,340 ha. 
The project activities are located in parts of Zone C valley plains and Zone D piedmont plains, which are are mostly used 

for agriculture and livestock grazing. Indus River and its tributaries are the main source of water for agriculture in the 
Province. Other major rivers that crisscross the province are  Kabul, Swat, Kunar, Siran, Panjkora, Bara, Kurram, Dor, Haro, 
Gomal and Zhob. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The KP Government will be the implementing agency. The last time these two departments, Agriculture Department and 

Irrigation Department  implemented a World Bank project was in 2001-2007, and there the Irrigation Department had a 
secondary role. This leaves much desire for familiarity with and improvement in the understanding of the Bank safeguard 
policies. Therefore, safeguards capacity support, handholding and training will be provided throughout the project 
implementation to ensure that they have adequate capacity to respond to project safeguard issues. 
 
A Project Coordination & Management Unit (PCMU)—led by the Agriculture Department, will be established to manage 

implementation and coordination. Project Implementation Units one each in Agriculture (or two in its sub departments) 
and Irrigation Departments will be established to supervise technical implementation in the field. The PCMU will have a 
senior Safeguards Specialist as part of the PCMU Team. PIUs  at the two departments level will be supported by individual 
environment & social safeguards consultants. These consultants will work closely with the engineering supervision 
consultants, and will provide input into the project design as per safeguards instruments (such as ESMF, RPF, RAP, etc.). 
The senior Safeguards Specialist at the PCMU level will be responsible for the overall implementation and performance of 
the safeguards documents, while the day-to-day screening, monitoring and implementation will be the responsibility of 

d specialists at the PIU levels. The project will have a Project Implementation Committee (PIC) co-chaired by 
Secretary Agriculture and Secretary Irrigation and membered by heads of the PIUs, Chiefs of Water, Agriculture & 
Livestock from P & D, to review the progress of project components. The senior Safeguards Specialist at the PCMU level 
will be a part of the PIC. All project implementation and supervision consultant firms will be required to have adequate 
social and environmental safeguards specialists. The contractors for civil works will implement Contractor ESMP, including 
all necessary guidelines on labor health, safety and environment.  
 
Project launch workshop will be organized by the task team once the project becomes effective and will include a 

detailed session on safeguard implementation arrangements. 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project activities involve irrigation infrastructure 
improvement, on farm water management schemes 
and production and post-production support to 
farmers and market actors. These activities are 
expected to cause some adverse environmental and 
social impacts. Overall, most of the impacts are 
expected to be during the construction phase and are 
likely to be temporary and reversible. Consequently, 
the policy has been triggered. Since project will also 
finance feasibility studies for dams, the scale and 
capacity of which is currently unknown. Based on 
existing information, the project has been categorized 
as Category A.   
 
The irrigation infrastructure improvement will overall 
improve irrigation efficiencies and help in ensuring 
availability of designed water flows at the tail-end of 
watercourses. However, improved infrastructure will 
not change the designed water allocations.Typical 
negative impacts associated with civil works financed 
by the project include land acquisition and 
resettlement; noise, air, soil and water pollution due 
to dust and exhaust emission and other wastes; 
vegetation clearance; damage to the existing 
infrastructures such as rural road, temporary water 
stoppages for irrigation, community and worker health 
and safety risks, etc. During operation, some potential 



 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 17 of 21  

     

adverse impacts are forecasted such as water 
pollution and spreading diseases by human and animal 
wastes, pesticides use potentially causing water and 
soil pollution, excessive application of irrigation water 
causing leaching of soil nutrients and changes in soil 
characteristics, etc.  
Since the exact location of subprojects are not known 
at present and will be identified during project 
preparation and implementation, framework 
approach has been adopted.  Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) along with 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) 
for the known priority projects will be developed by 
project appraisal. The ESMF will also include 
assessment of regional impacts on water quality, 
analysis of any possible changes in groundwater and 
downstream surface water availability. The ESMF will 
also include Terms of Reference for environmental 
and social impact assessment (ESIA) for the feasibility 
studies of small dams and environmental and social 
screening checklists/procedures for competitive grant 
program (project component C). 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

Most of physical infrastructure investments financed 
by the project are rehabilitation and improvement of 
the existing infrastructures. Some new construction 
activities such as construction of watercourses in new 
command areas and small-water storage tanks will 
take place on the existing agricultural lands. These 
activities are not expected to convert or degrade 
natural habitat. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.   
It is important to mention here that the project is 
supporting preparation of feasibility studies for 5 small 
dams or irrigation schemes. The studies will include 
EIAs. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project is not expected to impact forests and 
associated ecosystems as envisaged in the policy. 
Therefore, the policy is not triggered. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not support purchase of pesticides. 
However, the policy is triggered because the project 
interventions may lead to substantially increased use 
of pesticides and subsequent environmental 
problems. Thus, to mitigate this impact the project will 
apply an IPM approach with an IPMP prepared. 


     

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

At this stage, it is not possible to identify potential 
impacts on physical cultural resources (PCRs). 
However, final determination would be made by QER.  
Chance find procedures will be included in ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project area extends across KP, including Chitral 
district which is home to the Kalash who are 
recognized as Indigenous People (IP); hence, OP 4.10 is 
triggered. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF) for interventions in Chitral district will be 
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed publicly on 
the client’s website (in-country) and by the Bank prior 
to appraisal. Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs), if 
required, will be prepared for specific project 
locations. 
Given the cultural sensitivity and tribal nature of the 
area, the social assessment will carefully assess 
potential project impacts on IPs and mitigation 
measures including grievance redress mechanism will 
be developed through free prior and informed 
consultation as required under OP4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Small parcels of land will be required for project 
interventions. In most cases land needs will be met 
through Community or Voluntary Land Donations 
(VLD), the procedures for which will be laid out in the 
ESMF. In few cases small parcels may need to be 
acquired e.g. watercourses construction in new 
command areas (e.g. Bazai etc.). Certain interventions 
e.g. rehabilitation of existing water courses, may 
involve minor temporary impacts on livelihoods (due 
to restricted access; temporary dislocation) which 
could require small scale compensation. However, the 
impacts are not expected to be large scale. Hence OP 
4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement has been triggered. 
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for actual sites that 
may have been identified, will be prepared, consulted 
upon, and disclosed publicly on the client’s website 
(in-country) and by the Bank prior to appraisal. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The project will not directly finance rehabilitation of 
existing dams or construction of new dams. The 
project activities especially investments for 
improvements in irrigation infrastructure may rely on 
performance of the existing dams such as Warsak Dam 
on Kabul River or Munda dam on Swat River. However, 
the exact location of schemes are not known at 
present. The project will also finance feasibility studies 



     

for dams, scale and capacity of which is currently 
unknown. The policy is therefore triggered to ensure 
due diligence and for adequate coverage of 
environmental and social aspects/impacts. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The proposed project activities are located in the 
command area of tributaries of Indus river, which is an 
international water way (river). The proposed project 
activities under component 1 and 2 qualify to trigger 
this policy. The task team will consult LEGEN to 
determine whether waiver to notification to riparian is 
applicable. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
There are no disputed areas as defined in the Policy 
where project interventions are to be undertaken and 
therefore this policy is not triggered. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Sep 17, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
1. ESMF by 30 August, 2018 
2. ESMP for first year schemes by 30 August, 2018 
3. IPMP by 30 August, 2018 
4. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to provide guidelines for project interventions that could 

require land acquisition, and which may lead to resettlement and impact on livelihood. RPF will be completed by 30 
August, 2018. 
5. RAP for first year schemes by 30 August, 2018 
6. Ingenious Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared by 30 August, 2018. IPPs (Indigenous Peoples Plans) for 

the first year schemes will be prepared by 30 August, 2018, where required.  
7. Assessment of regional impacts on water quality, groundwater availability and downstream water availability will be a 

part of the overall ESMF, as well as the social assessment. Moreover, given the cultural sensitivity and tribal nature of the 
area, all assessments will carefully assess consultations/GRM/FPIC requirements.  
8. All feasibility studies will include a TOR on E&S screening and social and environmental impacts analyses.   
 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


 

The World Bank  
AP Integrated Irrigation& Agriculture Transformation Project (P160463) 

 

 

  
Feb14, 2017 Page 1 of 17 

 

Project Information Document/ 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 11-Nov-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC19733 


  BASIC INFORMATION 
   

  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P160463  AP Integrated Irrigation 
& Agriculture 
Transformation Project 
(P160463) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA March 1, 2018 Jul 26, 2018 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of Economic 
Affairs 

Government of Andhra 
Pradesh 

 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower   68.08  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  170.00  

Total Project Cost  238.08  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  
  

Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

Type here to enter text 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. India has sustained economic growth during last decade: India’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for 2016-17 is 
estimated at 7.6 percent, higher than the 7.2 percent for the preceding year, but lower than the projected 8.1-8.5 
percent for this year

1
. Sustained economic growth during the last decade, however, has contributed to annual decline in 

poverty by 1.5 percent, but income inequality has continued to persist. Emerging as one of the fastest growing 
economies, there has been significant upturn in key development indicators. Life expectancy at birth increased to 68 

                                            
1
Economic Survey 2016-17 



 
Years in 2014 from a low of 54 in 1980. India's per capita gross national income increased by about 338 percent between 
1980 and 2014, from $1,255 in 1980 to $5,497 in 2014. As a result, India has climbed five notches to 130th rank in 
Human Development Index among 188 countries in 2014

2
.  

2. Reducing poverty and creating jobs can fuel economy: Sustained economic growth notwithstanding, India 
remains home to 263 million poor people (80% of whom reside in rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day. Expansion 
of the economy in recent decades has largely resulted in jobless growth. For addressing these issues, Govt. of A.P has set 
an ambitious goal of achieving an annual growth rate of 8.2 percent, reducing poverty by 10 percent (poverty in the 
State is on a decline and currently stands at 9.2%, as per Socio-Economic Survey 2016-17), and creating 50 million new 
jobs.. It has been argued that adequate attention to agriculture could fuel growth, create  jobs and reduce poverty. In 
the wake of consecutive low monsoon rainfall and consequent decline in farm productivity, agriculture has served a 
wake-up call, demanding attention from policy makers. 

3. Agriculture sector continues to lag behind: The issues of inclusive growth and gainful employment are major 
challenges in rural areas where two-thirds of the workforce resides. About 66 percent of the labor force is employed in 
agriculture sector which accounts for 14 percent of GDP, and is saddled with problems of uncertain growth. Per capita 
land and water availability is decreasing while high intensity rainfall events and dry spells are increasing. Land and labor 
productivity continues to be low. 

4. Agriculture growth is essential in achieving India’s development goals: During the last 25 years, agriculture 
sector has not achieved the envisaged growth targets. In 1990s and 2000s, the annual agriculture growth rate was 
around 3-3.5 percent and declined to less than 1 percent in the last two years (2014-16) due to technology fatigue, 
degradation of land and water resources, growing water scarcity, exacerbated by two consecutive droughts, floods, 
cyclones, heat waves, and declining international commodity prices. The growth in agriculture sector in 2015-16 has 
continued to be lower than the average of the last decade, mainly due to a second successive year of lower-than-normal 
monsoon. Report from the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare for 2015-16 indicates that the 
production of food-grains and oil-seeds is likely to decrease by 0.5 and 4.1 percent respectively, while that of fruits and 
vegetables is likely to witness a marginal increase. 

5. To fuel the agrarian economy, strategic shifts in agriculture would  be aimed  (based on the Socio-economic 
Survey 2016-17 projections) at: (i) towards high value vegetables, fruits, livestock and fish products; (ii) towards value 
addition in post-harvest segments; (iii) towards diversification and resilience of farming systems to address climate 
change effects; (iv) towards nutrition sensitive agriculture; and (v) finally a shift towards improved water use efficiency. 

6. Many new schemes have been launched to effect the proposed shifts in agriculture: Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchai Yojana will fast track irrigation coverage and improve water use efficiency in rural areas; Parmparagat Krishi 
Vikas Yojana aims to reduce input costs by promoting organic farming; Pashudhan Sanjivani, Nakul Swasthya Patra, and 
E-Pashudhan Haat have been proposed to improve livestock productivity. There is an enormous potential for harvesting 
gains from transformation of irrigated agriculture as production, consumption and agribusiness shift from traditional 
cereal crops to horticulture, livestock and fish production. India has a comparative advantage in having a very large and 
largely untapped domestic market, which reduces reliance on exports as the principal driver and consumer of agriculture 
growth. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. Andhra Pradesh is a leading reforming economy: Bifurcated on June 2, 2014, the present state of Andhra 
Pradesh (AP) is a middle income state with an average per capita annual income of INR 107,532 which is 15 percent 
higher than the national average. The state accounts for 4.95 percent of India’s land mass, 4.09 percent of its population 
and 4.44 percent of its GDP. AP is predominantly a rural state with 70.4 percent population living in villages and 
dependent on agriculture as the main source of livelihood. Despite severe challenges following the division of AP into 
two states in 2014 (AP and Telangana), the state has recorded appreciable progress in terms of the objective of 
achieving inclusive growth with noteworthy performance in both development and welfare sectors. In 2015-16, the 
Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) grew at the rate of 10.99 percent, compared to corresponding growth rate of 7.2 
percent for the country. 

8. The sector-wise growth rate is equally impressive. At 2011-12 constant prices, agriculture grew by 8.4 percent, 
compared to industry by 11.13 percent and services sector by 11.39 percent. The per capita income of AP at current 
prices registered a growth of 12.38 percent over 2014-15. This has led to decline in the incidence of poverty from 45 
percent in 1993-94 to 9.2 percent in 2015-16

3
. AP is recognized as one of India’s leading reforming states and in the last 

two decades has achieved significant development outcomes through sustained policy and institutional reform 
programs in which the World Bank has been an important development partner. Rich in natural and human resources, 
the state is keen to leverage its strengths through specific growth strategies tailored to achieve double digit growth. 

9. Agriculture sector has performed below capacity: The performance of the state agriculture sector, which 
accounts for 27.6 percent of the state GDP and employs 62 percent of the work force, has been a cause of concern. 
Between 1999-00 and 2013-14 agriculture grew at around 2.1 percent per annum with most of this growth coming from 
livestock, horticulture and fisheries sub-sectors. In 2015-16 these sub-sectors respectively contributed 26, 25 and 15 
percent to the Agriculture State Domestic Product (AgSDP). Land use pattern is critical for agriculture growth, only 38.31 
percent of the state’s geographical area is net sown (6.23 million hectares). Majority of the farmers are small and 
marginal with average landholdings of 1.06 hectare (ha). The main crops are rice, groundnut, sugarcane, cotton, maize 
and Bengal gram. Due to seasonality and scarcity of water supply, cultivation is mostly limited to only one crop per plot 
per year, with a cropping intensity of 126 percent.  

10. The productivity of major crops has remained largely stagnant: The reason for low productivity is because AP is 
one of the severely water stressed states of India with an average annual rainfall of 966 millimeters, and a coastline of 
974 kilometers that is vulnerable to cyclones. Agriculture in AP is highly exposed to extreme weather events like 
droughts, untimely and high intensity rains, floods, cyclones and hailstorms. Increasing erratic weather aberrations and 
climate change are likely to exacerbate vulnerability of agricultural sector. Of the net sown area of 6.23 million ha in the 
state, 3.15 million ha is presently irrigated through a combination of canals, wells, tanks, ponds and other sources. 
Although 40,817 tanks cover a command area of 2.56 million ha, the actual area irrigated by tanks has declined 
significantly from about 1 million ha in 1990 (24% of irrigated area at that time) to 0.26 million ha in 2015 (8.4% of 
irrigated area).  

11. Irrigation is the key to revival of the agriculture sector: Due to deficient maintenance and management of the 
tank systems, as a result of which most tanks are performing well below the capacity, the actual area irrigated to 
potential created varies between 35-55 percent depending on rainfall. Some 35,376 tanks having a command area of 
0.32 million ha have been transferred from Panchayat Raj Department to Minor Irrigation Department. The rapid spread 
of groundwater irrigation has been an additional contributing factor to the decline in tank irrigation, and has also led to 
a serious depletion of groundwater resources across large parts of the state. Since most of the tanks are in rainfed areas 

                                        
 

with limited possibilities of providing other systems of surface irrigation, their decline poses a serious threat to the 
fragile agricultural economy of these areas.  

12. Poorer farmers, often found at the tail-end of dilapidated tank/pond systems (Small Scale Community Based 
Irrigation Systems- SSCBI Systems) and lacking resources to access groundwater irrigation amidst low and falling water 
tables, are particularly affected. In response to the difficulties being faced by the agriculture sector, the State 
Government has substantially expanded capital investments for modernizing irrigation infrastructure since 2006-07.  The 
Government has also taken steps to strengthen participatory irrigation management and AP was the first state in the 
country to adopt participatory irrigation management (PIM) following enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Farmers 
Management of Irrigation Systems (APFMIS) Act in 1997.  About 6,400 Water User Associations (WUAs) were formed 
which collect water taxes for meeting operation and maintenance (O&M) costs of tanks.  

13. Institutional development through capacity building has contributed to the success of PIM, a process that has 
been significantly supported by externally funded projects. The Bank-supported AP Community Based Tank 
Management Project (APCBTMP), which concluded in July 2016, has made significant development impacts in the state 
by rehabilitating 2,157 tanks, which resulted in 32 percent increase in tank command area and contributed to increase in 
paddy, maize and groundnut productivity by 36, 72 and 97 percent, respectively. In addition, tank rehabilitation resulted 
in 388 percent increase in fish productivity. 

14. Agriculture sector is in need of a paradigm shift: The negative consequences of low agriculture yields extend 
from precarious incomes of farmers to large tracts of land locked in low value agriculture, despite growing demands for 
high value products such as fruits, vegetables, and livestock products. According to NSS data4, the average annual 
income of the median farmer net of production costs (of 1 hectare) from cultivation is less than INR 20,000 in 17 states, 
including Andhra Pradesh. Add high cost of cultivation, growing indebtedness, climate uncertainty, ineffective 
procurement, insufficient storage space and market linkages, and it makes agriculture an increasingly uneconomical 
activity.5 The crisis in agriculture sector is evidenced by the ‘Crop holiday’ (farmers abstained from farming) observed by 
farmers of East Godavari district in an area of 85,050 acres in Kharif 2011, which is further reflected in continuing 
suicides by farmers in the state. During 2015, 516 suicides by farmers were recorded in AP

6
. 

15. Primary Sector Mission seeks institutional convergence for maximizing profitability: To pull agriculture from its 
current abysmal condition, AP requires a new paradigm with the following components: increasing productivity by 
getting “more from less” especially in relation to water; prioritizing the cultivation of less water-intensive crops, 
especially pulses and oil-seeds, supported by a favorable price regime that incorporates the full social benefits of 
producing such crops, and backed by a market-linked value chain. To effect a paradigm shift, GoAP has proposed the 
Primary Sector Mission to converge independently operating sub-sectors viz., agriculture, horticulture, fishery, and 
agribusiness into an integrated farming system for maximizing profitability of small and marginal farmers from a unit of 
arable land. The proposed project will showcase an alternate approach for leveraging capacities of relevant departments 
to improve farm incomes, and make agriculture resilient to climate change.  For a clear understanding at the highest 
level of authority in the state to prevent further deterioration of the socio-economic fabric in rural areas (exodus, farmer 
suicides), a more comprehensive, longer term approach based around adaptive management in agriculture is required – 
particularly given the climate projections and their impact on the agriculture and water sectors in AP. The GoAP has 
evaluated the results of different initiatives taken during the previous years to develop a comprehensive long term 
strategy aimed at making agriculture in the state productive, profitable, sustainable and climate resilient. The state has 

also realized that a mono-cropping production system based on capital intensive irrigation infrastructure and 
technologies has its limitations under the present circumstances with climate variables.    

16. To unlock the full potential of agriculture sector growth, AP has stressed a strong need for policies and programs 
to focus on: (i) improvement of water use efficiency; (ii) intensification of cropping systems and diversification to high 
value crops and commodities; (iii) enhancement of post-harvest management and value addition; and (iv) improvement 
of the resilience of agriculture system in order to deal with increasing threats of climate change. By reorganizing PIM 
with regular administrative systems, AP envisions realizing the full potential of its water sector reforms by achieving a 20 
percent increase in water use efficiency over the next five years. 

Relationship to CPF 
 
17. The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS): The proposed 
project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY 2013–17 to support poverty reduction 
and shared prosperity in India. The proposed project is aligned with two key pillars of CPS – ‘transformation’ and 
‘inclusion’. In line with ‘transformation’, the project aims to promote inclusive rural growth, development and 
dissemination of new agricultural and water management technologies, climate-resilient agriculture, enhanced market 
linkages for small and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource management (CPS Outcome 2.4). The 
proposed project will have positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced greenhouse gas emissions 
by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and promoting diversification to pulses and high value crops, which 
significantly reduce water and carbon footprint of agriculture (CPS Outcomes 2.5/2.6). 

18. The project is aligned with the Bank’s transformative and inclusive criteria:  With respect to ‘inclusion’, the 
project aims to enhance the livelihoods of small and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market 
access (CPS Outcome 3.6), and also by improving disaster management abilities of GoAP and local communities through 
enhanced design and restoration of smallholder irrigation infrastructure with better drought proofing and flood 
protection features (CPS Outcome 3.8).  

19. The proposed project will directly contribute to the achievement of 5 out of 17 United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG), namely:  

Goal 2 – End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and ote sustainable agriculture, by enhancing 
income, food security, and nutrition of large number of rural population, where majority of AP’s poor reside. 

Goal 6 – Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all by investing in irrigation 
infrastructure, promoting a whole range of water saving technologies for irrigated agriculture, which uses 
about 75 percent of all water in the state. 

Goal 8 – Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent 
work for all by promoting a broad-based agriculture growth and employment in rural areas, where more than 
two-third of country’s population are employed. 

Goal 9 – Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation by 
rehabilitating and modernizing irrigation infrastructure (supply canals, water tanks) with enhanced resilience 
features of flood protection in about 1,211 tanks. 

Goal 13 – Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts and reduce GHG effects of agriculture production 
by promoting a wide range of water saving technologies and agricultural practices (SRI, micro-irrigation), 
expanding areas under pulses and high value crops, which consume less water, and also by enhancing 
awareness-raising, human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, and impact 
reduction. 

 
20. The project will also coordinate with other Bank-supported projects in Andhra Pradesh and at national level 
including Assam Agriculture project, Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project, Andhra Pradesh-Telangana 
Water Sector Improvement Project, National Hydrology Project, and National Groundwater Improvement Project to 
ensure synergy and enhance long-term project impact. 

 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)     
 

The Project Development Objective is to enhance agricultural productivity, profitability and resilience of Small Scale 
Community Based Irrigation Systems (SSCBI Systems)

7
in selected districts of Andhra Pradesh.  

 
21. The project beneficiaries will include small and marginal farmers, water users associations, farmer producer 
organizations, and other agro-entrepreneurs. During project preparation, specific target areas will be identified and 
specific interventions will be designed to benefit women and other vulnerable groups.  

 
 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

22.  The following 5 Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are proposed to measure key outcomes of the project: 

(i) KP#1: Number of Farmers / farmer groups adopting resilient technologies and practices –(such as  Agriculture Technology,  

water  productivity/efficiency)  (Corporate Result Indicator) 

(ii) KP#2: Percentage increase in irrigation supply in the project area / selected tank command area  

(iii) KP#3: Percentage increase in productivity (for selected crops, vegetables and fisheries), and  percentage increase in 

returns from two selected agriculture commodities over the baseline value through development of supply chain 

(iv) KP#4: Number of farmers benefitted through increased access to agricultural assets and services – disaggregated by 

gender   

(v) KP#5: GHG: Change in incremental value to various Carbon stock assessments in selected plots (Corporate Result 

Indicator) 

D. Concept Description 
 

. Description 
 
23. Project Rationale: The proposed project is seized of GoAP initiatives in ameliorating the current distress in the 
state farm sector. The biggest challenge for the state is to pull farmers out of the current crises. To achieve food and 
nutritional security, the issues related to growing water scarcity, degrading land resources, high cost of cultivation, 
stagnant farm productivity, and the impacts of climate change need to be systematically addressed. AP with 13 districts 
and 6 agro-climate zones has great potential for growth and profitability in agriculture and allied sectors (fisheries & 
horticulture). This is what the project seeks to realize by providing transformative direction to the agriculture sector by 
packaging and up-scaling relevant technologies and appropriate practices, and by supporting reforms (Primary Sector 
Mission) that could support more effective policies and management practices to improve the productivity of 
agriculture, animal husbandry, and fisheries to increase net benefits, and improve equity and livelihoods 

24. Alternative considered:  

25. In line with the Government of India’s policy imperative on getting ‘more from less’, especially in relation to 
water, the project proposes to improve SSCBI for realizing underutilized potential of decentralised irrigation system for 
benefitting small and marginal farmers for producing less water-intensive crops, especially pulses and oil-seeds, and 
creating a favorable procurement ecosystem towards improved profitability under emerging specter of climate change. 
 

 
 

 
26. Innovative design: The project design is consequently built on the key lessons learnt from the APCBTMP 
and from similar projects in other States (Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra), clubbed with the emerging need of 
integrating with climate variables, and value addition to the SSCBI Systems for reducing farm-level water footprints, 
and for enhancing carbon stock in farmers’ fields in providing a strategic direction to develop climate-resilient 
sustainable production systems. The innovative aspects will include improved designs of smallholder irrigation 
infrastructure for efficient capture, storage and delivery of rain water, strong focus on improving water-use 
efficiency, recent advances in intensification and diversification of agriculture, agri-entrepreneurship, and 
movement toward climate resilient agriculture with relevant agriculture-water related investments and substantial 
improvements of participatory irrigation management practices.  
 
27. Improved resilience of agriculture production systems is expected to be achieved under the project 
through improving soil organic carbon, higher water use efficiency, reducing crop water footprints through 
diversification, and increased adoption of technologies and practices for optimizing and sustaining productivity. 
Project activities will be complimented by the use of innovative information and communication technology (ICT) for 
enhanced efficiencies and faster turnaround time for delivering services to project beneficiaries, and new media 
technologies for real time reporting and data sharing among project teams working at different levels. 
 
28. The total project cost is expected to be around US$ 238 million, of which the World Bank will finance US$ 
170 million (70 percent of total project cost) and the GoAP will finance US$ 68 million (30 percent of total project 
cost). The project activities will cover the entire state of Andhra Pradesh (its individual components will cover 
different geographic areas) and will be implemented over a six-year period. The project activities would be grouped 
into four main components: (i) Improving Irrigated Agriculture Efficiency at Farm Level; (ii) Promoting Adaptive 
Sustainable Agriculture Practices; (iii) Post-harvest Management, Market and Agribusiness Promotion; and (iv) 
Project Management and Capacity Building. The individual components have been detailed below.  

 
Component A: Improving Irrigated Agriculture Efficiency at Farm level  (approx. US$ 110 million) 

 
29. This component would improve SSCBI systems to strengthen the integrated farming system (in which 
growing crops, agro-forestry and rearing of livestock co-exist) with reduced water footprints. It will consist of four 
inter-related sub-components: (i) institutional strengthening and capacity building (ii) improving Small Scale 
Community Based Irrigation System (SSCBI System) performance and resilience; (iii) improving water productivity 
and efficiency; and (iv) building synergy with the Primary Sector Mission (on agriculture, fishery, horticulture, 
livestock and irrigation). 

 
Sub-component A.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building 

 
30. The sub-component would focus on engaging communities through water users’ associations (WUAs) in 
social engineering of project interventions. The Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) will follow a distinct 
approach where better operation and maintenance (O&M) of rehabilitated smallholder tank systems will be 
dovetailed with irrigation outreach based on reduced water footprints through adaptive agriculture practices 
(Component B) at the farm level.This sub-component will also sensitize water users and ensure that a desired level 
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission is managed at the tank level. Water use efficiency will be the leitmotif for 
creating a culture for ‘more crops, per drop’ through community based institutions for assuming greater 
responsibility towards making water-conserving crop choices for water conservation and management. The sub-
component will support in strengthening the existing WUAs and establish new WUAs for effectively developing all 
aspects related to efficient in situ water conservation and management practices. The component would enhance 

WUA capacity in grounding the concept at the farm level. 
 
31. In addition, the sub-component would relate to mobilizing water users for collective action through the 
vehicle of WUAs for ensuring local level participation in planning, implementing and managing the SSCBI facilities as 
well as establishing backward and forward farm-linkages with the external government, private sector and non-
government agencies. The proposed project would expand the scope of ‘SSCBI” beyond the ‘crop irrigation’ into 
others - fisheries, animal husbandry and domestic users. The spheres of intervention would include: (i) Policy and 
Governance - educating and enabling enactment of the existing legislative provisions and  exploring new vistas for 
establishing relation between different sets of water users; (ii) Physical and Engineering- creation of assets, 
including capacity building support for designing and implementing construction, as well as managing procurement, 
finance and quality control; (iii) Operation and Maintenance (O&M) involving physical sustainability and improved 
irrigation performance leading to enhanced production/productivity, incomes and food security; (iv) Social 
mobilisation - local level organizational development including leadership building and problem solving approaches, 
empowerment of poor and vulnerable sections such as women, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes etc., and 
provision of capacity support and capacity building including observation and study tours; and (v) Economic - fixing 
and collection of water tariff and building of a corpus to enable further modernization and diversification, market 
penetration to enable establishing backward and forward linkages; and the related book keeping.  

 
Sub-component A.2: Improving  Small Scale Community Based Irrigation (SSCBI) System Performance and 
Resilience 

 
32. This sub-component will modernize irrigation infrastructure, including SSCBI systems and irrigation canals 
within a defined catchment and also use a cascading management approach. The modernization of irrigation 
infrastructure will focus on improving the bulk water delivery to irrigation systems through rehabilitation and 
modernization of approximately 1,211 smallholder irrigation structures. The expected works will include 
modernization of control structures (diversion weirs), supply channels, cross-masonry structures, de-silting

8
 of 

feeder and supply channels, construction of recharge well structures and strengthening and up-gradation of tank 
bunds, installation of flow measurement devices, up-gradation of distribution systems, improvements of irrigation 
and drainage canals, and introduction of modern quality testing devices to determine soil compaction parameters, 
as well as modern quality testing devices for meticulously maintaining specified cover to reinforcement steel in the 
construction of reinforced concrete structures for long term durability.In addition, relevant catchment treatment 
approaches will be considered for reduced siltation, reliable and dependable flow to cascade SSCBI systems. 

 
Sub-component A.3: Improving Water Productivity and Efficiency 
 
33. The objective of this sub-component will be to promote water saving technologies such as drip and 
sprinkler systems, and for implementing Participatory Groundwater Management (PGM) at assessment unit level. 
The investments will include catchment and command area treatment of SSCBI systems, including construction of 
group based mini-irrigation schemes (dug wells, shallow tube wells, water harvesting and groundwater recharging 
systems).For drought proofing and capturing flood waters, cascades will be linked. Robust automation systems will 
be demonstrated, which will enable spatial homogeneity in water delivery in these systems.  
34. Conjunctive use of surface and groundwater will be coordinated with crop planning and water budgeting. 

                                            
8
Considering economic and environmental perspectives, desilting of the tank will be limited only to remove silt from the tank bed to 

use for raising and strengthening tank bund during the rehabilitation of tank bund in such a way that sufficient area upstream of 

sluices is de-silted on priority to ensure free flow of water towards the sluices. 


Water sharing by groundwater users (with surplus water) with those without irrigation source will be promoted; and 
pipelines provided for efficient water distribution (as implemented in APCBTMP). Consolidation and linking of 
groundwater sources piloted in Anantapur district under the World Bank supported AP Drought Adaptation 
Initiative will be encouraged. All development and improvement activities will be included in an Integrated Water 
Resource Conservation and Management Plan (IWRCMP). A basin level ridge to valley treatment for water 
conservation and management in convergence with the activities of all the primary stakeholders and implementing 
departments will be undertaken. 

 
Sub-component A.4: Building Synergy with Primary Sector Mission 

 
35. For effective service delivery to farmers, various departments and entities involved in water, agriculture 
and related sub-sectors need to collaborate. For achieving this GoAP is working towards forming a consortium of 
knowledge stakeholders, including relevant state line departments, knowledge institutions, civil society 
organizations and other relevant national and international organizations to support planning, implementation and 
monitoring the activities of the Primary Sector Mission. The project will provide support to policy and institutional 
reforms for enhancing institutional capacities of relevant departments. The sub-component will provide incentives 
for capital investments, including through unlocking opportunities for crowding-in private sector investments. 
Support will also be provided for guiding, designing and implementing holistic strategy for the Primary Sector 
Mission.  
 

36. As an innovative design feature, the project will use information and communication technology (ICT) 
tools, sensors and remote sensing in two ways – (i) leveraging Internet of Things (IoT) technologies combined with 
sensors to remotely capture data and information on various aspects pertaining to minor irrigation systems such as 
water flows, water quality and (ii) use ICT and remote sensing products for monitoring and evaluation (M&E). 
 
Component B: Promoting Adaptive Sustainable Agriculture Practices (approx. US$ 79 million) 
 
37. This component aims to improve productivity of the tank systems and enhance resilience of agriculture 
production systems for increasing production and managing risks associated with climate variables. This would be 
achieved by diversification of farm production, introduction of climate resilient solutions, improving value 
realization at the farm level through improved post-harvest management, and strengthening farmer-market 
linkages. The component will provide incentives for capital investments by unlocking opportunities for crowding-in 
private sector investments. This component will have three sub-components: (i) Promoting climate smart 
diversified agriculture production systems; (ii) Innovation and technology transfer for fishery production; and (iii) 
Post-harvest management, marketing and agribusiness promotion.  
 
Subcomponent B.1: Climate Smart Diversified Agriculture Production Systems  
 
38. Sustainable intensification and diversification of crop and horticulture production systems will be achieved 
by awareness creation, on-farm demonstrations on new seeds and promising technologies, capacity building and 
training activities; and by leveraging private sector investments in water management and farm mechanization. 
Climate risk resilience will be built in agriculture production systems by promoting crop diversification from rice to 
low water requiring pulses, maize, oilseeds, millets, vegetables and fruits; cultivation of high yielding, short 
duration, drought-, pest- and disease-tolerant crop varieties/hybrids; complementary agronomic practices; and 
building ability to withstand biotic and abiotic stress through a large scale program of demonstrations, and training 
activities as well as investments in farm implements and resource saving technologies like micro irrigation systems 



to enhance water use efficiency and land productivity.  Component interventions will focus on irrigated command 
areas of the project, and   will also cover the rain fed areas in the project villages and cascades. The project will 
support operationalization of web-based integrated weather forecasting and water management system to 
provide real time crop advisories, including water, pest and disease stress, and implementation of mitigation 
measures and contingency plans. A baseline of Green House Gas (GHG) emissions from agriculture production 
systems will be established and would be regularly monitored for changes during the project period.  
 
39. The project will focus on increasing farm productivity by reducing ‘input’ costs and enhancing ‘output’ 
from farming systems on a sustainable basis. This will be achieved by (a) adopting diversified cropping system on 
‘navdanya’

9
 pattern to buffer weather anomalies; (b) promoting comprehensive, crop specific sustainable 

agricultural package of practices; (c) installation of integrated weather forecasting systems to provide weather-
based crop advisories in selected smallholder irrigation cluster areas; and (d) developing a mechanism to quantify 
crop resilience to climate variability, and creating a baseline for quantifying soil organic carbon and GHG emission 
from crop production systems. 
  
Subcomponent B.2: Innovation and Technology Transfer for Fishery Production 
 
40. Fish production has registered an average annual growth rate of 9.92 per cent in AP. Building on this, the 
component aims at improving fish productivity and profitability in the project tanks and ponds which offer high 
economic opportunities and benefits. The GoAP accords top priority to fisheries development in the state, and has 
released the Fisheries Policy and Plan for 2015-2020. Under this policy, the government has approved the fiscal 
benefits covering several sections of the industry, including production, processing, marketing and disease 
management for stimulating development of the fishery sector. 
 
41. The subcomponent will focus on strengthening research-extension linkages in order to improve farmers’ 
access to technology, and support participation of fish farmers in value chains. Project aims to promote innovative, 
climate resilient, and modern technology packages in production, post-harvest management and marketing. The 
project will (i) support multiplication of improved germplasm for quality seed production, (ii) introduce suitably 
formulated fish feed using locally available ingredients; (iii) demonstrate semi-intensive and intensive production 
models at appropriate locations in ponds; (iv) promote improved fish production techniques in irrigation tanks 
including innovative technologies such as cage culture in an environmentally sustainable manner; and build 
institutional capacity of the fishery sector. The project will facilitate suitable linkages for better access to markets, 
and support measures for maintaining hygienic conditions throughout the fish value chain. 
 
Component C: Post-harvest Management, Market and Agribusiness Promotion (approx. US$ 32 million) 
 
42. This subcomponent will enhance farmers’ linkages to markets by providing alternate marketing channels 
and promoting farm level aggregation, post-harvest management and value addition. The project will support 
organizing producers into farmer producer organizations (FPOs) and companies (FPCs); develop their capacity and 
skills for accessing wider input and output markets; and investment support to the FPOs for establishing common 
service centers for aggregating grains and horticulture produce. The expected benefits to the FPO members are 
higher prices through a combination of larger critical mass of saleable produce, thereby providing economies of 
scale, savings in transaction costs, and strengthened negotiation positions, coupled with the added value achieved 

                                            
9
‘Navdanya’ means nine seeds (a traditional diversified cropping system which includes cereals, millets, and pulses), a system of 

farming that produces food while enhancing biodiversity, building soil fertility and conserving water. 



through primary grading and packing. The project will support integration of producer organizations in commercial 
value chains of agricultural commodities, and facilitate public-private partnerships to enable direct buying 
arrangements.  Key strategy will be market oriented agricultural production through collective marketing by 
farmer producer organizations. 
 
43. For mitigating price risks the project will support operationalization of Negotiable Warehouse Receipts in 
AP. For promoting agri-business ecosystem in the state, an Agri-Business Promotion Facility (ABPF) will be 
established. The ABPF activities will include conducting market and value chain studies on the identified 
commodities; establishing and operating mentorship programs; scouting new technologies (including climate 
resilient technologies); assisting small and medium private entrepreneurs to prepare business and financial 
proposals; and providing business planning and incubation services to emerging agri-entrepreneurs.  
 
44. The value chain for selected commodities will help to increase the share of farmers in wholesale and retail 
prices of the commodity. Some of the measures to achieve this include farmers’ participation in commodity 
exchanges, establishing storage infrastructure starting from primary, intermediate and transit warehouses for 
value addition. For high value crops, emphasis would be laid on demand based production, post-harvest 
processing, and creating forward linkages for direct marketing. Such a production and marketing system would be 
aimed at encouraging farmers to diversify into high value crops for additional income. 
 

Component D: Project Management and Capacity Building (approx. US$ 16 million) 
 
45. The objective of this component is to ensure smooth implementation of project activities, as well as 
monitoring of, and learning from project processes and outputs. Activities to be financed include: (i) setting up, 
supporting and capacity building of project management unit (PMU) to align with the project components at the 
state and district level; (ii) project monitoring, evaluation and promotion of learning culture at the PMU level; (iii) 
documentation of project processes and experience on a rolling basis, and its dissemination to the wider 
development community for cross-learning and sharing; (iv) hiring services of an external M&E agency as 
consultants for the duration of the project for creating a feed-back loop for improving project thrust and 
implementation; and (v) providing support for emerging needs and innovations during implementation; and 
networking with partner organizations, external professional agencies and the World Bank. 
 

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)     

 
Andhra Pradesh is located on the east coast in peninsular India facing the Bay of Bengal. The State has three 
physiographic zones, the hilly region (having Nallamalai, Erramalai hills and the Eastern Ghats having an altitude of 500 
to 1400 m); the plateau (having an altitude of 100 m to 1000 m) and the deltas of rivers (between the Eastern Ghats 
and the Sea Coast).  It has a coast line of 974 km and its major rivers are   Krishna, Godavari, Tungabhadra. It has about 
21% of the geographical area under forest cover with 6 National Parks and 21 Wildlife Sanctuaries. It has an ancient 
religious/cultural heritage and Tirupati is one of the most popular temples in the country. 
 
The state is drained by three major perennial rivers viz. Godavari, Krishna and Pennar, several other medium and small 
rivers. In total 40 rivers drain into the sea. Rainfall varies from 560 mm in the Rayalaseema region to about 1200 mm in 
the northeastern coastal part of the state. The State receives about 66% of rainfall from south-west monsoon (June-


\and about 25% from north-east monsoon (October-December). The stage of ground water development is 
around 70%. Six Agro-Climatic Zones are recognized – Scarce Rainfall Zone, Southern Zone, North Coastal Zone, 
Godavari Zone, Krishna Zone and High Altitude Zone. The state experiences frequent storms, floods particularly in 
coastal areas and drought in the Rayalseema region 
 
The project activities will involve investing on repair and rehabilitation of about   1200 tanks spread across the  state.  
The interventions will include: improving water assets, modernizing irrigation infrastructure, improving water 
productivity, promoting adaptive sustainable agricultural practices, enhancing fisheries production and climate friendly 
agri business promotion.  Andhra Pradesh (erstwhile undivided) is known to be a leading consumer of agrochemicals in 
the country with 24% share and 21% share in pesticides alone. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies     

 
Safeguard issues revolve around augmenting and/ or re-engineering the existing minor irrigation tanks along with 
water conveyance system and other associated activities related to enhancing production, productivity and incomes in 
the spheres of agriculture and fisheries.  The key intervention relates ensuring bridging of the gaps between designed 
and actual irrigable area with participation by the local water using communities.  Major challenge thus lies in 
mobilizing the local tank based community towards group action and establishing linkages with other public and 
private sector institutions. This has been addressed successfully under the first project (Andhra Pradesh Community 
Managed Tank Project) with the help of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The proposed 
project would build on the same, but taking into account the latest legislative developments and expanded scope of 
the interventions, into agriculture and fisheries. Environment Management Plans (EMP) will be prepared for tanks that 
are known to be rehabilitated by appraisal. In addition, the project will develop a Pest Management Plan (PMP). All this 
points to adequate capacity for safeguards management with the borrower.  
 
The previous project has put in place a robust systems   in place and capacities are developed for managing the social 
and environmental impacts. Adequate number of experienced professionals too have been deployed for managing the 
ESMF.  However, as the follow on project’s scope is enhanced both in terms of the number of tanks and the 
interventions, GOAP has already initiated efforts towards re-visiting the ESMF. The learnings drawn the 
implementation experiences of the first project will be fed into this revision.  

 
D. Policies that might apply     

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The physical investments under the project would be 
largely on rehabilitation of existing water assets 
where improper construction could result in adverse 
impacts. The investments under productivity 
enhancement through sustainable agriculture 
practices could result in positive impacts with 
effective planning an implementation. 


An Environmental and Social Assessment will be 
undertaken and a Social and Environmental 
Management Framework will be developed for 
managing risks and maximizing the environmental 
and social opportunities. These will take into account 
experiences and learnings from the previous phase.  
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 
The rehabilitation of tanks may impact natural 
habitats such wetlands, which will be determined 
during EA. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project interventions are not expected to impact 
the forest areas. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not directly finance pesticides but the 
improved irrigation and crop diversification may 
result in increased use of pesticides. The project will 
work in synergy with the state primary sector mission 
and focus on climate smart agriculture production 
system which will promote the non-chemical package 
of practices. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be 
prepared for the project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

No significant adverse impacts on cultural property 
expected, but this issue will be examined during the 
ESA and appropriate measures will be put in place to 
deal with any chance findings. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

AP state has a tribal population of 2.7 million 
amounting to 5.5% of the total population. A few 
pockets in three districts are predominantly inhabited 
by tribals and are covered under the Fifth Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution. So, project areas is likely to 
have tribal population. However,   investment plans 
are currently not known. Hence, to address such 
situations wherein the project is likely to be taken up 
in tribal areas, a Tribal Peoples Planning Framework 
(TPPF) will be prepared. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will not and need not resort to 
involuntary acquisition of lands as the existing 
irrigation tanks will focus of repair and rehabilitation. 
However, cases of encroachers on /within the Tanks 
cannot be ruled out. To address this, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework will be prepared. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

Some of the tanks could be large with high 
embankments above 10 m. The heights of the 
embankments will be known by appraisal for 
ensuring that appropriate mitigation measures are 
put in place for addressing any potential adverse 
environmental impact. This policy was also triggered 



 

during the previous phase and arrangements were 
put in place.  Already, a robust mechanism exist in 
the state, which will be further strengthened. Three 
region-wise Dam Safety Panels (DSPs) were 
constituted by the Government to function with 
technical guidance from the Chief Engineer, Central 
Designs Organization. 
The project will seek better coordination with the 
Dam Safety Panel and processes. The project will also 
support safety enhancement of tank systems as part 
of tank rehabilitation. 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not fall on any international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project is not in any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan      

 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 

May 31, 2017 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
GoAP will undertake social and environmental assessment so as to revise the existing environmental and social 
management frameworks (ESMF), in conformity with applicable Bank policies as well as the national and state legal 
stipulations. EMPs will be prepared for tanks that are known to be rehabilitated by appraisal. Apart from the 
comprehensive ESMF, the following independent documents-- Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Tribal People 
Plan Framework (TPPF) – will also be prepared. These are expected to be completed by end August 2017. 

 



















































PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC11855

Project Name Bangladesh NATP-2: National Agricultural Technology Program - Phase II 
(P149553)

Region SOUTH ASIA
Country Bangladesh
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (50%), Animal production (20%), 

Crops (20%), Information technology (10%)
Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Technology diffusion (25%), 

Rural markets (25%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P149553
Borrower(s) Economic Relations Division, Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture (MOA)
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

04-Sep-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

09-Sep-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

05-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

26-Feb-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
Building on its remarkable social and economic performance over the last 20 years, Bangladesh 
aims to become a middle income country by 2021; to achieve this will require among other that the 
GoB overcomes considerable challenges in agricultural development and rural economic growth. 
The country’s GDP growth averaged 5.8 percent between 2000 and 2010, accompanied by a decline 
in the national poverty headcount rate from 48.9 percent to 31.5 percent over the same period, 
effectively lifting some 16 million people out of poverty. Bangladesh, a country of over 160 million 
inhabitants, has also made noteworthy gains in education and health, and is well set to achieve most 
of the MDGs.  
Bangladesh remains a predominantly agricultural country and growth and development 
achievements in rural areas must be brought on par with those in urban areas. Agriculture occupies 


some three-quarters of the scarce land space of the country and supports the livelihoods of the 
majority of the population. While overall poverty has significantly declined over the 2000 to 2010 
period, the poverty headcount in rural areas (still 35.2 percent) has not declined as fast as in urban 
settings; moreover, the proportion of people living in extreme poverty in rural areas is still three 
times higher than in urban areas. The contribution of agriculture to the country’s economic output 
has declined over the past decade, but crops, livestock, forestry, fisheries still combine for almost 
one-fifth of GDP. Moreover, with some 70 percent of the population living in rural areas and over 
43 percent of the country's total labor force engaged in agriculture, achieving further economically, 
socially and environmentally sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction will require 
policies and investments conducive of lasting transformational changes in rural areas – including 
through technological innovations in agriculture.

Sectoral and Institutional Context
To eliminate the country’s extreme poverty by the year 2030 and to promote shared prosperity for 
the poorest 40 percent, agriculture  must continue to grow (in ways that are sustainable and adapted 
to climate change) and rely on a more diversified production base. Poverty reduction in rural areas 
depends crucially on growth in agricultural productivity, which is driven by investment in 
infrastructure, generation of new or improved technologies adapted to changing climate, and their 
adoption by farmers and other value chains actors (e.g. processors). Sustainable intensification and 
diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination and adoption). This needs to 
be supported by appropriate value addition and market linkages through smallholder participation in 
emerging/established supply chains for higher value agriculture. To achieve these strategic goals, 
the GoB has been seeking the support of development partners such as the Bank, to develop and 
finance activities aimed at boosting agricultural production through productivity enhancement, and 
increasing smallholders’ income.   
In Bangladesh, while the performance of the NARS has been impressive in contributing to food 
security (in particular with rice), research in some key sub sectors (e.g. livestock, fisheries) has yet 
to reach its potential productivity in terms of releasing a sufficient stream of useful innovations 
(including a range of new climate smart technologies for production and post-harvesting). The 
extension system has still extremely limited reach into the myriad communities of the nation (in 
particular for the fisheries and livestock subsectors were local level public extension workers are 
absent), and worse, hardly communicates with the NARS, or the relevant private and non-
government entities also engaged in technological advance. In short, the national agricultural 
innovation system is far from exploiting the systemic interactions that should drive it to success, and 
the insufficiencies pervade the system both within the subsystems, the all-too disconnected and in 
some instances less than strong elements of the NARS: public-private links are disturbingly absent, 
and links between research entities public and private with the higher education sector are sparse 
and severely underexploited. To enable agriculture and stakeholders to adapt readily when 
challenges occur and to respond readily when opportunities arise, the proposed project will seek to 
overcome some of the key constraints to increasing the efficiency and performance of the national 
agricultural innovation system. 
The National Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP, 2012) and the Bangladesh Agricultural 
Research Council Act (BARC, 2011) provide the sector policy framework for the proposed 
NATP-2. NAEP advocates inter alia the development of decentralized, integrated, demand-driven 
agricultural research and extension services. Support is now required for the Department of 
Agricultural Extension (MoA) towards achieving the strategic objectives of the NAEP and as well 

as technical assistance for the Department of Livestock Services and the Department of Fisheries 
(both MFL) for the completion of their respective sector extension strategy/policy. The 2012 BARC 
Act aims at fostering the coordination of research activities conducted by the twelve NARS 
institutes, making BARC responsible for the allocation of resources among the NARS institutes and 
for the approval of the institutes’ research programs; it is among other things expected to reduce 
duplication of research efforts and enhance accountability. Implementation of the BARC Act 
remains a challenging process and requires additional financial and technical assistance. Further, 
there are some significant differences in the institutional capacity and performance among the 
various NARS institutes (with livestock and fisheries lagging behind), and the project is expected to 
strengthen the research agenda and outcomes for livestock and fisheries given the importance of 
these sub sectors for rural economic growth and rural livelihoods.

Relationship to CAS
Agriculture has long occupied a central place in the Bangladesh development agenda and in the 
CPSs of the WBG. In the CPS for FY11-14 (subsequently extended to FY15), agriculture is 
highlighted in Pillar 3, Vulnerability, Adaptation and Inclusion, although the sector surely 
contributes to the growth Pillar 2, and benefits from initiatives under the 4th Pillar of Governance. 
As the CASPR (Report No. 73983-BD) of November 20, 2013 notes concerning Pillar 3 Outcome 
3.1 on Agriculture and Food Security, program implementation has been ramping-up and is showing 
significant improvements in agricultural productivity as measured in crops and livestock 
performance. Recurrent natural disasters and deficiencies in technology remain the basic threats to 
improvements in agricultural production, and are therefore the focus of Bank interventions in the 
sector. IFC, with financing from the Pilot Program for Climate Resilience, is also assisting by 
supporting the climate resilience of agribusiness companies and their supply chains, and is 
exploring availability of low-cost housing and livestock protection structures in flood-prone coastal 
areas. Furthermore, IFC’s investment climate and advisory services include activities in agriculture 
that are complementary to NATP-2 (e.g. development of Seed Act and National Seed Policy, 
strengthening of sanitary and phyto-sanitory registration and certification system, development of 
the dairy value chain). The proposed follow-up to NATP Phase 1 was retained in the revised CAS 
for FY15 implementation.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
6. The proposed project development objective (PDO) for NATP-2 is to enhance the 
agricultural productivity of smallholders through better research and extension and improve their 
market access through better integration in selected value chains. To that effect, NATP-2 will 
support a decentralized, demand-driven agricultural research and extension services, and promote 
market-oriented smallholder production. NATP-2 will also support access to markets for 
smallholder farmers by facilitating their linkages with selected value chains, contributing in turn to 
increased farm income and to the sustainability of farmer groups and producer organizations formed 
by the project. The following project design emerged as an outcome of the Identification mission: 
Comp.1: Promoting Agricultural Innovation, Comp.2: Supporting Crops Development; Comp.3: 
Supporting Livestock Development; Comp.4: Supporting Fisheries Development; and Comp.5: 
Project Management and Coordination. 
7. NATP-2 will achieve the PDO: (i) by strengthening the capacity of the NARS and the 
extension services to generate and diffuse agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm 
productivity; and (ii) by promoting the sustainability of existing and newly created farmer groups 

and producer organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification 
and diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported 
by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the strengthening of supply chains for 
high value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research 
and extension, it will need to have a stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value chains 
and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under 
NATP-1.

Key Results (From PCN)
(i) Client satisfaction (including for female-led households) with the agricultural extension and 
advisory services provided by the agricultural innovation system has increased  
(ii) New technologies generated by the agricultural innovation system have been adopted by 
producers (including by female-led households) and other value chain actors targeted by the project  
(iii) The increase achieved in agricultural productivity (for crops, fisheries and livestock) is 
larger for farmers supported by the project  
(iv) The proportion of smallholder agricultural production marketed relative to total smallholder 
farm output has increased 
(v) The women-led Common Interest Groups for homestead gardening are making a significant 
contribution to improving nutrition in participating households

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
NATP-2 will achieve the PDO by: (i) continuing to strengthen the capacity of the NARS and 
extension services to generate and disseminate agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm 
productivity; and (ii) promoting the sustainability of existing and new farmer groups and producer 
organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification and 
diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive 
national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development 
and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported 
by appropriate value addition and market linkages through the development of supply chains for 
high value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research 
and extension, it will need to have a much stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value 
chains and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under 
NATP-1. A differentiated approach will be required for project activities at field level to account for 
the vertical and horizontal scaling up efforts under NATP-2. The new project will deepen the 
interventions in existing upazillas (vertical scaling up) while expanding the geographic coverage to 
include new districts and upazillas (horizontal scaling up) . 
The project design for NATP-2 takes into account some of the shortcomings identified under 
NATP-1 and reflects the integrated approach required to achieve the PDO. NATP-2 includes a 
broader component that addresses the multiple dimensions required for decentralized, demand-
driven agricultural research as a core pillar of an agricultural innovation system in the country 
context. The project further includes three sub sector components, each tackling specific constraints 
to the development of selected commodities from technology generation to transfer and adoption at 
farm level, to market-oriented production and agro processing. This value chain approach is 
expected to lead to a better integration of research and extension, which was regularly reported in 

NATP-1 as an area requiring further improvement. Finally, the project includes a component that 
covers most cross-cutting activities as well as regular project management tasks. Project 
components, their objectives and contribution to the PDO, as well as the core activities covered, are 
described below. 
 
Component 1: Enhancing the Agricultural Innovation System 
This component, led by the Project Management and Coordination Unit with implementation 
support from other agencies, will support the development of decentralized, demand-driven and 
integrated agricultural research. This component will likely include investments, capacity 
enhancement and technical assistance in areas launched under NATP-1 (such as sustainability of 
Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and emerging Producer Organizations (POs), rehabilitation of 
rural markets, technical advisory services), strengthening National Agricultural Research Institutes  
(NARI) (including investments in physical infrastructure), developing one-stop farmer advisory 
service centers. The component will also include the window for competitive research and matching 
grants under the Agricultural Innovation Fund.   
 
Component 2: Supporting crop development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Agricultural Extension, will support the 
development of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for crop production 
(including horticulture), post-harvest management and processing, and facilitate the integration of 
smallholder farmers in selected crop-based value chains (bananas, vegetables, and aromatic rice). 
This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance in e.g. 
smallholder farm mechanization, seed testing facilities (with IFC), an electronic phytosanitary 
certification system (with IFC), food safety, agricultural commercialization, and promotion of 
smallholder-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the 
adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support 
to private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) 
will be secured through the corresponding AIF window.  
 
Component 3: Supporting fisheries development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Fisheries, will support the development of 
decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for fish and aquaculture, and facilitate 
the integration of smallholder fish farmers in selected commodity value chains (tilapia, major carps, 
and shrimps). This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical 
assistance in e.g. the rehabilitation of fish ponds, food safety, quality improvement of fish feed and 
fingerlings, fish commercialization and the promotion of aquaculture-based commodity value 
chains. Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and 
post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support to private small and medium agro 
entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) will be secured through the 
corresponding AIF window. 
 
Component 4: Supporting livestock development  
This component, coordinated by the Department of Livestock Services, will support the 
development of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for livestock products, 
and facilitate the integration of smallholder farmers in selected commodity value chains (dairy, goat 
meat). This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance 
in e.g.: laboratory infrastructure and equipment (including at the regional level), artificial 
insemination, fodder production and conservation, efficient biogas production, farm mechanization, 




food safety, and the promotion of livestock-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to 
smallholder farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing 
technologies, as well as support to private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected 
value chains (e.g. food processing) will be secured through the corresponding AIF window. 
 
Component 5: Project Management and Coordination 
Under this component a Project Management and Coordination Unit will be in charge of overall 
day-to-day project management and implementation, as well as coordination among the project 
PIUs from the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Food. The PCMU will have the operational, 
safeguards and fiduciary responsibility and be accountable for overall project performance. The 
PCMU will carry out procurement and financial management activities. Other specific PMU-led 
activities under this component will include among others: (i) the support to the development of a 
national agricultural atlas, (ii) the coordination of third-party project monitoring and impact 
evaluation (with baseline, midline, endline surveys), (iii) the coordination of analytical studies and 
dissemination of findings, (iv) the support to short- and longer term assistance to the project 
management team and other agencies involved in component implementation, (v) the coordination 
of all staff training and (vii) preparation studies for a potential follow-up operation (phase III of 
NATP).

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 200.00 Total Bank Financing: 150.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 3.00
 International Development Association (IDA) 150.00
 US  Agency for International Development (USAID) 25.00
 Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change 0.00
 International Fund for Agriculture Development 22.00
 Total 200.00



















































COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC15495

Date Prepared/Updated: 28-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: India Project ID: P155617
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Assam Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project (P155617)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

05-Sep-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

22-Dec-2016

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Sector(s): Agricultural extension and research (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade 
(30%), Crops (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), 
Animal production (10%)

Theme(s): Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Trade facilitation 
and market access (20%)

Borrower(s): Republic of India
Implementing 
Agency:

Assam Rural Infrastructure and Agricultural Services (ARIAS) Society

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 50.00
International Development Association (IDA) 200.00
Total Project Cost 250.00

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 



(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
1.      During the last decade, India’s economy expanded at an average annual rate of 7.6 percent, 
and projections are for the high growth rate to continue.  Despite the headline figures on growth, 
concerns linger about the pattern of growth. India continues to face daunting challenges in 
reducing the number of poor, creating jobs, and achieving shared prosperity. Long term 
agricultural growth remains volatile, fluctuating around 3 percent per year.  With India’s labor 
force predominantly in rural areas, and about 68 percent employed in agriculture, the political, 
social and economic importance of agriculture continues. 
 
2.      The Government of India (GoI) recognizes the important role of agriculture in the ongoing 
rural-urban transformation process and the potential it represents as an important source of growth 
and job creation.  The GoI also recognizes the necessity of strategic shifts for structural 
transformation of Indian agriculture to tap into this potential of growth and job creation.  These 
shifts reflect underlying trends in demand for food and factors affecting the supply of agriculture 
produce, and include:  (i) a shift away from a focus on foodgrain production towards 
diversification into high value agriculture production of fruits, vegetables, dairy, etc.; (ii) a shift 
away from a focus on on-farm production towards value addition in the post-harvest segments of 
agriculture value chains; (iii) a shift away from a focus on productivity towards resilience of 
agriculture production systems for addressing the effects of climate change; and (iv) a shift away 
from a focus on agriculture production towards nutrition sensitive agriculture. 
 
3.       To facilitate these four shifts, GoI has launched a number of policies and initiatives since 
2014. These include, among others, a technology driven second green revolution with a focus on 
higher productivity and diversification; a “National Adaptation Fund” to meet the challenges on 
climate change; a nationwide District Level Incubation and Accelerator Programme” focusing on 
micro, small and medium enterprise (MSME) sector; and a scheme for promotion of a National 
Agricultural Market to accelerate the integrated development of agriculture marketing and trade. 
 
4. Consumer demand for food commodities in India is rapidly changing, fueled by strong 
economic growth.  The structural shift in consumption pattern away from cereals to high value 
agricultural commodities is seen both in rural and urban areas.  This in turn is generating growing 
domestic demand for higher quality/value agricultural commodities (including animal proteins) as 
the share of cereals and staples in food expenditure declines, whilst that of animal proteins, fruits 
and vegetables increases.  This provides opportunities for farmers to obtain higher incomes from 
increasingly smaller holdings. 
 
5. Signaled by changes in consumers’ food baskets, India’s agriculture and agri-food marketing 
system is poised for a profound transformation.  The agri-food marketing system is changing from 
ad hoc transactions towards coordinated systems like cooperatives, producers’ associations and 
contract farming.  Public policy has been proactive in facilitating this transformation.  The central 
and state governments have taken important policy initiatives, such as de-regulation of food 
industry, enactment of an integrated food law, de-monopolization of agricultural markets, 
reduction in excise duties on manufactured food products, and priority sector lending to food 
industry to strengthen agriculture-industry linkages. 

Food processing is a “sunrise sector” and its share in GDP is on a continuous rise, with a 
compound annual growth rate of 8.4 percent. According to the Annual Survey of Industries 
2012-13 the food processing sector ranks first amongst all industry groups, both in terms of total 
number of factories (16%) and  number of factories in operation (16%), and third in terms of total 
output (12%), next only to ‘coke and refined petroleum products’ and ‘basic metals’.  More 
importantly, this sector is the largest employer amongst all industry groups, accounting for 11.59 
per cent of industry employment in India.  Its employment intensity can be seen by the fact that 
for every INR 1 million invested, 18 direct jobs and 64 indirect jobs are created in organized food 
processing industry.  Furthermore, food in India has an economic multiplier of 2-2.5, thus 
implying that not only the food products industry can be the antidote for India’s jobless growth, 
but that such a scenario may come at a relatively low (fixed capital) cost. 
 
7. Transition to high value commodities and opportunities in agro-food processing underscores 
the enormous potential for commercialization and income growth in agriculture (including small 
holder) as production, consumption and trade shift from traditional food crops to horticulture and 
other non-traditional (high value) commodities.  Moreover, relative to other countries, India has 
considerable comparative advantages in having a very large (growing and largely un-tapped) 
domestic market, which reduces reliance on exports as the principal driver for near term 
agriculture growth.  Nonetheless, beyond the domestic market there are also strong comparative 
and competitive advantages in developing high value agricultural trade, which is currently 
negligible.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
8. In Assam, agriculture and related sectors are the principal occupation of the vast majority of 
rural population in terms of employment and livelihood. About 90 percent of state’s population 
lives in rural areas and is mostly dependent on agriculture for their livelihoods.  Agriculture and 
the allied sectors directly or indirectly support more than 75 percent of the population, providing 
employment to about 50 percent of the total workforce.  While the average operational holding in 
India is 1.10 hectare, Assam’s farmer families are predominantly small and marginal (85%) with 
an average land holding of only 0.63 hectare. 
 
9.      The recently concluded the Assam Agricultural Competitiveness Project (AACP) was 
instrumental in increasing cropping intensity, on-farm productivity and diversification of 
agriculture in the state. Supported by AACP and other Government of Assam (GoA) initiatives, 
high value horticulture has seen a significant growth in production - the annual growth rate of 
production of fruits, spices and vegetables was 19.2, 6.4 and 72.2 percent respectively in the last 
decade, with Assam contributing significantly to national production in commodities like ginger, 
banana, pineapple, litchi, etc. As such AACP has laid the foundations for long term agriculture 
transformation in the state by shifting the focus from rice production towards diversification into 
high value agriculture production (vegetables, spices, fish, dairy etc.).  This move towards higher 
value products offers opportunities to increase contribution of agriculture to Assam’s growth. 
 
10. Diversification to higher value commodities and opportunities in specialized commodities 
reflect significant opportunities and challenges for farming communities in Assam:  growing 
specialized commodities would need adoption of rapidly changing technologies and quality 
standards.  Smallholder farmers face significant challenges in learning about and adopting rapidly 
changing agriculture technologies.  The Bank supported AACP has successfully introduced the 
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) model, a participatory, decentralized 



planning, funding and implementation of technology dissemination to district, block and village 
levels in partnerships with farmer groups, and different line departments.  While the ATMA 
platform has introduced improvements in technology transfer and demand driven extension, the 
current approach focuses mainly on production related issues.  Its capacity needs to be 
strengthened to enhance the ability of farmers to adopt efficient and market led production and 
post-harvest practices for meeting the volume, timing and quality requirements of different 
markets. 
 
11. The key constraints in structural transformation of agriculture in Assam are limited market 
access, poor post-harvest handling infrastructure and fragmented supply chains:  agriculture 
marketing in Assam is characterized by a multiplicity of regulatory authorities in the state (viz., 
local panchayats, municipalities and state agriculture marketing board).  Reforms would be 
needed not only to harmonize the regulatory regime in the state, but also for the development of 
alternative marketing options for farmers.  The supply chain is characterized by the dominance of 
middlemen at different levels, involving pre-harvest contractors, forwarding agents, commission 
agents, wholesalers, sub-wholesalers and retailers.  The existence of multiple intermediaries 
causes prices to snowball with each transaction.  Despite the comparative production advantage in 
agriculture and allied commodities, and emerging marketing opportunities, conversion of this 
advantage into competitive food processing industries has proved to be a challenge in the state.  
There is low investment in assets and limited technology penetration across the food processing 
sector in the state, even though this sector contributes about 22 percent of the industrial output 
and represents 26 percent of gross value add of the state.  The food processing sector is largely 
unorganized and operates on a small scale.  Facilitating the development of organized Micro, 
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) both for value addition and job creation, would require 
handholding, business facilitation services, and facilitation of access to financing, along with 
critical regulatory changes for agro and allied MSMEs to flourish in the state. 
 
12.     GoA recognizes that creating conditions for agriculture based rural transformation in the 
long term would require:  (i) a shift away from a focus on on-farm production towards value 
addition in the post-harvest segments of agriculture value-chains; (ii) a focus on productivity 
towards resilience of agriculture production systems in order to deal with the effects of climate 
change; and (iii) creating the necessary conditions for the emergence of a dynamic agri-business 
and enterprise sector in Assam.  Furthermore, GoA at the highest level is committed to 
transforming the agriculture and allied sector to a more commercial and market oriented 
production; promoting MSMEs and implementing necessary reforms for realizing the project 
goals. GoA has also stated its intention that this project will form the nucleus of a much larger 
government agribusiness and rural transformation program. Fundamentally this will involve 
mainstreaming of project’s initiatives in government programs and policies as well as 
convergence of various public programs to deliver along the objectives enshrined in this project. 
Especially the government will oversee the refocusing and strengthening of training and human 
resources program to support (agriculture) enterprise development activities in Assam.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
13.   The proposed World Bank support to this project is consistent with the current Country 
Partnership Strategy (CPS) for India (2013-2017). The CPS outlines Bank support to India under 
the three pillars of integration, transformation and inclusion with a cross-cutting focus on 
improving governance, environmental sustainability and gender equality.  The proposed project is 
aligned along at least two of these three pillars – transformation, and integration.  Under 
transformation, the project will directly help achieve one of the intended outcomes of the CPS, 



which is increase investor confidence and inward financial flows into the agriculture sector (CPS 
para 43).  The broader objective would be to instill a collective entrepreneurial spirit where 
producers shift from being “price takers” of primary produce, with no or very little influence over 
the market to being more business and value focused.  A key project thrust will be on enhancing 
agglomeration of producers to improve economies of scale in producing, processing and 
marketing.  In parallel with this, the project will support agriculture and livestock productivity 
(including value and incomes) through essential technology transfer in production and improved 
post-harvest and market operations, and also explore and pilot possible financing modalities to 
support entrepreneurship and agri-business (CPS outcome 2.4 para 86 and 89).  Overall, the 
support of the project to the development of higher value commodities and more efficient supply 
chains will underpin ongoing structural transformation of the economy (CPS para 34).  Under 
integration, the project offers the opportunity to increase gross state domestic product (GSDP) 
growth by stimulating private sector investment and agri-enterprise development in Assam, a 
special category state. (CPS, Outcome 1.4).  
 
14.   The project will also leverage the pent-up demand and natural resource advantages of the 
state as well as improve the investment climate (CPS para 72).  In particular, the focus will be on 
processed food, agribusiness, logistics and infrastructure, and MSME finance and insurance. The 
project will establish a new standard of excellence for entrepreneurship and business skills 
training by improving skills and knowledge transfer from trainers to MSMEs (CPS, Outcome 
1.3). Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned with the WBG’s goal of promoting shared 
prosperity.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
15. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to “increase value-added and 
improve resilience in the production and processing of selected agriculture commodities, focusing 
on small farmers and agro-entrepreneurs in targeted districts”.  
 
16. Project beneficiaries will include farmers and entrepreneurs especially in the MSME 
segment.  Others would include farmer producer organizations, sector management companies, 
and other value chain participants.  During preparation, specific attention would be given to 
gender inclusion in project design and implementation arrangements. The methodology followed 
to identify targeted districts is elaborated in the Annex 3, attached to the PCN.

Key Results (From PCN)
17. The Key Project Indicators (KPI) will be:  
 
a) Increase in value addition by agri-enterprises; 
b) New agri-enterprises established in the targeted districts; 
c) Number of jobs created, including for women (percent); 
d) Increase in value of agricultural marketed output per farm (in formal partnership);  
e) Increase in market oriented production – (% of farmer and area under cultivation); and  
f) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percentage).

D.  Concept Description

18.   The proposed project would support, value addition in the production and post-harvest 
segments of selected agriculture value-chains; facilitate agribusiness investments through 


inclusive business models that provide opportunities to small farmers as well as stimulate the 
establishment of new small and medium agribusiness enterprises; and support resilience of 
agriculture production systems in order to better manage increasing production and commercial 
risks associated with climate change, in the targeted districts . The project would adopt a cluster 
strategy within the targeted districts to generate economies of scale; promote vertical and 
horizontal links between local agricultural enterprises; enable diffusion of innovations; leverage 
network externalities; and channel public support for services and infrastructure. By adopting a 
cluster approach, the project would enable all the value chain participants to develop competitive 
and innovative products that meet market demands rapidly and successfully. 
 
19.    The project would achieve the PDO by:  (i) promoting investments in agri-enterprises, 
reducing the business and transaction costs, facilitating access to finance for agribusiness 
entrepreneurs, and, where appropriate, push for process, regulatory and/or policy change; (ii) 
supporting the development of a modern supply chain; improved information communication 
technologies (ICT) based farm information and intelligence services, and alternative marketing 
channels; and (iii) improving producer’s access to knowledge, technologies and infrastructure so 
that they are able to respond to market opportunities and climate variability. 
 
20.    By simultaneously intervening along multiple dimensions of the growth nexus (business 
environment, key infrastructure, access to basic services, local governance), the proposed project 
aims to remove key constraints to business development and strengthen the platform for growth in 
agriculture and allied sectors within targeted districts.  By doing so, it will contribute to the key 
aspects of the GoI, GoA and the Bank’s CPS strategic objectives related to faster and broader 
agriculture sector growth and inclusive development. In line with the PDO, the project will have 
the following components. 
 
Component A: Support to Agri Enterprise Development 
 
21. The focus of this component to enhance the pace of agricultural enterprise growth and 
employment in the targeted districts.  This would be done by establishing a cohesive institutional 
platform, and securing increased private sector investment in the development of value chains, 
processing and marketing in the targeted districts. 
 
Component B: Farm - Market Infrastructure Development 
 
22. The focus of this component is to establish a modern supply chain from farm to market that 
would enable farmers and other value chain participants to access new markets. This would be 
done by enabling secondary and tertiary processing that creates higher value for the produce; 
improving value realization at the farm level through improved sorting, grading and packing of 
produce that enhances the average price realized; supporting a supply chain infrastructure that 
prevents wastage and value erosion in transportation, and allows access to more distant markets; 
and supporting the development and up-gradation of basic and agriculture-specific infrastructure, 
including transportation linkages, warehousing capacity and wholesale market facilities. 
 
Component C: Market-led Production and Resilience Enhancement 
 
23.  The focus of this component is to enable farmers in the targeted districts to take advantage of 
the rapidly changing consumer demand and ensuring resilience of agriculture production systems 


in order to better manage increasing production and risks associated with climate change.  This 
would be done by diversification of their farm production; and introduction of climate resilient 
solutions. 
 
Component D: Project Management, Monitoring and Learning 
 
24. This component will ensure effective implementation of the project activities and monitor and 
evaluate project implementation progress, outputs and outcomes, building on implementation 
experience of AACP.  The component will support: (i) establishment and operations of a Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU), which will oversee and coordinate activities of the implementing 
agencies of the project; (ii) establishment and operations of Project Implementation Units in the 
respective implementing agencies; and (iii) setting up of a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
system for the project, including a project management information system, and contracting an 
external M&E agency to monitor project activities and impact. This component will also finance 
dedicated staffing for the project activities, consultancies, training and related material, office 
equipment, and incremental operational costs. The Project will provide investment and technical 
support for the establishment of a sound management information system and information and 
communication technology (ICT) systems and accompanying capacity strengthening of key 
personnel. 
 
25.      Green House Gas (GHG) Accounting: In accordance with guidelines for IDA 17 projects, 
GHG accounting for the proposed Project will be undertaken during the preparation phase. This 
analysis will help to measure the impact of the project on the GHG footprint and also guide 
investments that contribute to climate mitigation, given that world-over agriculture investments 
account of 25% of the GHG emissions. The conceptual framework of the proposed project 
indicates there could be reduced GHG emissions and carbon sequestration benefits as a result of 
interventions such as adoption of improved cropland management, plant nutrient management and 
conservation farming practices, soil health/fertility enhancement, whereas increased emissions 
and decreased carbon stocks could result from cropland expansion and increased electricity and 
fuel consumption during past harvest management, processing and transportation.  There is a 
paucity of specific carbon accounting data for the agri-horticulture sector.  The implementing 
agency will coordinate with the relevant departments to collect the relevant data for these 
analyses.  Furthermore, the recently concluded AACP and other government and donor-aided 
projects will provide a basis for developing carbon balance estimates for the proposed project.  
This accounting exercise will be undertaken using established methodologies that are consistent 
with the international best practice to measure GHG emissions in the proposed project.  The ex-
ante carbon balance tool developed by FAO has been selected as the primary tool for GHG 
accounting in agriculture. The analysis will be carried out by a World Bank team during the 
project preparation phase in close collaboration with state government counterparts and will be 
finalized by project appraisal.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
Though the project location and boundaries are yet to be established, it is expected to cover most of 
the state, and would comprise of critical landscape features, ranging from hills and mountains on the 
one hand and floodplains and wetlands on the other. Water quality in Assam has often come under 
scrutiny for presence of natural fluorides, iron and arsenic. Assam is also endowed with a good forest 


cover and rich biodiversity that is well protected with several designated Protected Areas. The 
project will support small infrastructure development including rural roads that may require land and 
leading to minimal adverse impact on people including those who belong to Schedule Tribe, 
Schedule Caste and other vulnerable groups. Proposed agri-infrastructure development under the 
project could have adverse impacts on natural features, such as, wetlands, if not sited and built 
appropriately. Disposal of construction waste would require monitoring, as it could block natural 
drainage channels if dumped casually. Such impacts would necessitate an Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) and management plans and/or framework for managing adverse environmental 
and social impacts and risks.

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The state is well versed with the Bank’s safeguard policies, as it has, over the past several years, 
implemented the World Bank funded projects including the recently concluded Assam Agricultural 
Competitiveness Project (AACP) wherein the safeguards have been rated as Highly Satisfactory in 
the Implementation Completion and Results Report. The ARIAS society, earlier supported under 
AACP would be responsible for implementing the project’s environmental and social safeguards. 
ARIAS Society would be suitably staffed for this purpose. An ESA will be undertaken that would 
identify the potential adverse environmental and social impacts and risks. The ESA would develop 
and include an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that would have 
appropriate mitigation guidance for complying with the Bank’s safeguard polices. The proposed 
ESMF would draw from the experience of implementing the existing one for AACP and build upon 
new activities that would be supported under this project, including wider dissemination and use of 
the Integrated Pest Management Plan developed under AACP. A good reporting mechanism on 
safeguards already exists in AACP and will be continued. At present all project locations are not 
known, therefore the use of framework is proposed. The ESA would be undertaken based on a 
sample of locations covering most of the proposed investment activities under the project. Therefore, 
even though the nature and scope of investment activities would be known, it may so happen that 
actual physical locations may not be known until an advanced stage of preparation. Therefore, an 
ESA will be done during preparation but an ESMF would be used during implementation. As far as 
possible and as the project design evolves, the borrower would ensure that some of the sampling 
locations and sites for the ESA are actual locations/sites proposed for project interventions. In 
addition, the proposed ESMF would include a screening mechanism that would allow for preparation 
of specific EMPs to mitigate adverse impacts of infrastructure investments, once exact location and 
design of infrastructure activities are identified. These would be particularly required for rural feeder 
roads, rural markets and supply chain infrastructure. At this stage, neither the scope and nature of 
infrastructure investments nor the locations are known. By appraisal, the borrower will develop site-
specific EMPs for infrastructure whose locations have been determined and detailed technical 
designs completed.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
Mridula Singh (GSU06)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes An ESA is required as the project is likely to support 

new activities that were not included in the recently 



OP/BP 4.01 completed AACP.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes The State has a widespread network of naturally 
occurring wetlands (beels) and would require 
mapping of potential impacts through project 
supported infrastructure and other agricultural 
investments.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No The project is unlikely to bring any management 
changes to the State’s forest resources that are 
governed under a robust national law.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes There is likelihood of use of pesticides and other 
agrochemicals once project investments are realized. 
The project would promote the wider use of the Pest 
Management Plan and Integrated Pest Management 
Plan that was developed under AACP.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

No The project will not impact any physical, cultural 
and/or religious sites and will be implemented in 
areas where agriculture is already practiced.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

Yes The policy is triggered, accordingly a Tribal 
Development Framework will be prepared to address 
impact. It will also include an action plan to ensure 
that equal opportunities are provided to access 
benefits.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The policy is triggered as land may be required for 
the small infrastructure and rural roads. Resettlement 
Policy Framework including Social Management 
Framework will be prepared.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No The project will not support construction, 
refurbishment and replacement of equipment etc. of 
any dams. It also does not support rehabilitation of 
existing or building any new irrigation schemes 
originating from existing dams in the State.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD During project preparation applicability of this policy 
would be determined based on a technical analysis.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No Project activities do not fall in any disputed areas.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
01-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The safeguards documentation would require four to six months for completion from the time it is 
started. We expect it to be ready by September 2016.



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Myanmar National Food and Agriculture Systems Project (P164448) 

 
 

  
June 20, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

 

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 14-Jun-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23462 

 
The World Bank  
Myanmar National Food and Agriculture Systems Project (P164448) 

 
 

  
June 20, 2018 Page 2 of 16  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Myanmar P164448  Myanmar National 
Food and Agriculture 
Systems Project 
(P164448) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Oct 01, 2019 Apr 22, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Republic of the Union of 
Myanmar 

Ministry of Agriuclture, 
Livestock, and Irrigation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to, “increase productivity of select high value commodities, enhance 
agricultural diversification and competitiveness, and diet diversity in selected agro-ecological zones of Myanmar”.  This 
will be achieved through the provision of key public goods and services that will facilitate and further enhance the 
engagement of (and with) the private sector. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Credit 100.00 

   
 
Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. The political reforms of 2011-2015 in Myanmar and economic liberalization coincided with strong economic 
growth and macroeconomic stability, followed by a slowing of economic activity since 2015.  After reaching 8.5% annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in 2014/2015, economic activity began to slow down with growth reaching 7% and 
5.9% in 2015/2016 and 2016/2017, respectively, due to (i) a challenging macroeconomic environment characterized by 
high inflation, and a reduction in government spending; (ii) a decline in commodity exports (gas and agriculture); (iii) 
constrained private and public investments; (iv) contraction of the agriculture sector due to the extreme weather shocks 
of the 2015/2016 El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event; and (v) a decline in industrial output.  Expectations of strong 
exports, industry and services activities contributed to a positive growth forecast for 2017/2018 at 6.4%, counterweighing 
a slow agricultural recovery1. The agriculture sector continues to be vulnerable to supply shocks and demand fluctuations 
from major trading partners (e.g., China and India) affecting the sector’s potential to significantly and sustainably 
contribute to growth and poverty reduction of Myanmar. 
 
2. Despite a decline in poverty in Myanmar over the last decade, poverty remains high and inequality is increasing.  
Nearly 70% of Myanmar’s population lives in rural areas where poverty is prevalent.  The poverty incidence fell from 48.2% 
in 2004/2005 to 42.4% in 2009/2010 to 32% in 2015, making it today one of the poorest countries in Southeast Asia 2.  The 
decline in poverty was rapid in urban than rural areas with the urban-rural gap being substantial in 2015, i.e., 38.8% of the 
rural population are found to be poor relative to 14.5% of the urban population.  In addition, one in ten households fail to 
meet their basic food needs.  In addition to the 32% of the population identified as poor, 14% are categorized as near-
poor making them vulnerable to shocks from crop failures, natural disasters, and health setbacks.  A sizable proportion of 
Myanmar’s poor rely on agricultural activities as smallholder farmers or casual employment with low income 
diversification and high reliance on paddy production.  Female headed households are not identified as being poorer than 
male headed households irrespective of level of profit making, the poor have limited dietary diversity, and have weaker 
productive and financial asset base.  Although living standards of the poorest in Myanmar improved, greater 
improvements were noted among richer households contributing to inequality increase.  There were no significant 
changes in the welfare of the poorest 10% of the population relative to the obvious welfare changes of the average 
household.  
 

        e variations in poverty incidence across the agro-ecological zones (AEZ)3 of Myanmar.  The poverty 
headcount rate in the Hills & Mountains AEZ is 40%, in the Dry AEZ the rate is 32.1%, in the Delta AEZ, the rate is 26.2%, 
and in the Coastal AEZ, the poverty headcount rate is 43.9%.  The Hills and Mountains and the Coastal AEZs have a lower 
share of the population living in them, yet they comprise 47% of the food poor, and 38% are in the bottom quintile of the 
expenditure distribution.  These two AEZs combined have 40% poverty rate and one in six will struggle to meet their basic 
food needs.  Nearly 65% of the poor reside in the densely populated Dry AEZ and Delta AEZ.  Even though the Delta AEZ 
has the lowest poverty head count rate, the number of poor in this area is significant due to its high population density 
(5.5 million poor which also includes Yangon) relative to the 2 million poor in the Coastal AEZ4. 

 
4. Myanmar’s human development faces numerous challenges.  While net primary education enrollment is high 
(93%), there is substantial student drop-out in enrollment at the secondary level resulting in net total enrollment of 55% 
in 2015.  Gender enrollment gaps have been narrowing over time.  On health outcomes, 41% of children under the age of 
five are stunted, 30% are underweight, and 11% are wasted.  In addition, 40% of the population between ages 5 and above 
are overweight or obese, and close to 1 in 7 infants are born with a low birth weight.  It was estimated that on an annual 
basis, Myanmar loses nearly US$400 million in GDP to Vitamin and mineral deficiencies.5  Overall, Myanmar’s Human 
Development Index (HDI) is 0.556, well below the average for East Asia and Pacific (0.720), ranking it 145 out of 188 
countries.  As a result, Myanmar is on a slow path towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) health 
outcomes. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. Despite Myanmar experiencing rapid structural change over the last decade, it is still an “agri-based” economy.  
Agriculture’s share of GDP declined from 52% to 32% during 2000-2015, while manufacturing share increased from 11% 
to 28%.  Nevertheless, the sector shares of employment remained constant over the last decade.  Agriculture continues 
to be the largest employer with agriculture’s share of jobs registering nearly 52%.  More than one-third of workers (nearly 
8.5 million jobs) identified farming as their primary source of employment through work in own family farms, and 16% 
(equivalent to 2.6 million people) are agricultural laborers.  The employment share in services and industry were 36% and 
12%, respectively.  The formal modern sector in Myanmar contributes to only 11% of the jobs.  
 
6. Agricultural growth relative to other sectors is low and volatile in Myanmar.  In 2011/12, agriculture growth was 
-0.7%, 1.7% in 2012/13, 3.6% in 2013/14, 2.8% in 2014/15, 3.4% in 2015/2016, and 4.3% in 2016/17 respectively.  The 
average sector growth during the period 2011/2012-2016/2017 was 15%, which is substantially lower than the 55% and 
59% growth seen in the industry and services sectors, respectively6.  Hence, contribution of the agriculture sector to the 
growth of Myanmar’s economy over time has been small.   

 
7. Low agricultural growth in Myanmar is attributed to low productivity7 with varying degrees across the agro-
ecological zones.  Paddy land and labor productivities in Myanmar are among the lowest in Asia.  In 2013/2014, the 
average land productivity for paddy was 2.7 tons/ha in Myanmar, 3.9 tons/ha in the Philippines, 2.8 tons/ha in Thailand, 
6.7 tons/ha in China, and 5.8 tons/ha in Vietnam.  Within Myanmar, paddy productivity and profitability are the lowest in 
Ayeyarwady and Sagaing States, and highest in Shan State.  Average paddy yield was 2.7 tons/ha (dry paddy equivalent) 

                                            
3 There are four agro-ecological AEZs in Myanmar: (i) Hills and Mountainous AEZ (covers Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, and Shan States); (ii) Coastal AEZ 
(covering Rakhine and Taninthayi); (iii) Delta AEZ (covering Ayeyarwady, Bago, Mon, and Yangon); and (iv) Dry AEZ (covering Mandalay, Magwe, Nay 
Pyi Taw, and Sagaing).  
4 “An Analysis of Poverty in Myanmar: Part 02-Poverty Profile”. December 2017. World Bank. 
5 “Nutrition at a Glance”. World Bank. 
6 “Myanmar Agriculture Public Expenditure Review”. 2017. World Bank. 
7 Productivity estimates are derived from the “Myanmar: Analysis of Farm Production Economics”.  

or 3.5 tons/ha (wet paddy equivalent).  This puts Myanmar on the lower end of rice production relative to rice producing 
Asian countries.  Labor productivity for paddy is also low.  For example, in monsoon season, the labor return from one 
day’s work yields 23Kgs of paddy, relative to 62Kgs in Cambodia, 429Kgs in Vietnam, and 547Kgs in Thailand.  Although 
Myanmar’s labor productivity is higher during the dry season, it is still considered very low in comparison with other 
countries.  Paddy production in Myanmar is still labor intensive (farmers in Ayeyarwady spend more than 100 days/ha of 
monsoon paddy relative to 52 says in Cambodia, 22 days in Vietnam, and 11 days in Vietnam).  
 
8. Productivity of non-paddy crops are also low but generally higher than paddy productivity also with varying 
degrees across the agro-ecological areas.  Myanmar’s farming systems are diversified and produce a range of non-paddy 
crops with higher productivity than paddy.  The labor productivity (value of crop per day of labor) of black gram, green 
gram, chickpeas, groundnuts, sesame, and sunflower seeds ranged from $9.29/day to $15.92/day, while for both monsoon 
and dry season paddy labor productivity was $4.75/day and $9.20/day, respectively.  The productivity of non-rice crops 
also varied across the agro-ecological zones depending on the production potential of each area.  For example, the 
productivity of green gram in Ayeyarwady (Delta AEZ) was $13.39/day while in Sagaing (Dry AEZ) productivity was at 
$17.69/day.  
 
9. Low earnings for both paddy and non-paddy production, although earnings from the latter are higher, reflects 
on the low agricultural competitiveness of Myanmar relative to its regional neighbors.  In 2013/2014, the net margin 
($/ha) from producing monsoon paddy averaged $114/ha (ranging from $88/ha in Ayeyarwady to $337/ha in Shan State 
due to proximity to China, resulting in higher farm-gate prices and lower input prices relative to other areas in Myanmar).  
Although the profitability of the dry season paddy was higher at $246/ha, this is still considered low relative to the earning 
of farmers in neighboring Asian countries.  In addition, male-headed households accrue higher profits than female headed 
households for many crops (for few crops the gender differentials in earning is insignificant).  On the other hand, the 
profitability of non-paddy crops (black gram, green gram, chickpeas, groundnuts, sesame, and sunflower seeds) is higher 
and ranged from $141/ha to $581/ha.  The earning differentials between paddy and non-paddy is due to the higher 
production cost of the former crop.  The low earnings raise alarming concerns about the potential of agriculture at its 
current state and a primary focus on paddy alone to achieve agricultural growth and uplift rural households from poverty.   
 
10. The inferior performance of Myanmar’s agriculture sector is first a legacy of past agricultural policies and 
investments centered on rice to attain primarily food security.  This was conducted through input intensification mainly 
for rice.  Public agricultural investments neglected undertaking “Resilient”, “Inclusive”, Competitive”, and 
“Environmentally” (RICE) sustainable investments that takes advantage of Myanmar’s diverse farming systems.   
 
11. The undersupply of quality agricultural public goods plays a significant role in Myanmar’s low agricultural 
productivity and weak support for diversification.  According to the 2017 World Bank Agricultural Public Expenditure 
Review8, the most underfunded function in the sector is agricultural research while there is compelling evidence of high 
returns to investments in core public goods related to technology generation and diffusion, market linkages and 
infrastructure, especially when augmented by policy and institutional reforms.  Undersupply of public goods: first, 
agricultural extension services are limited in number and have weak capacity to provide outreach to farmers.  The ratio of 
extension staff and farm family is very low (nearly 1 to 585)9.  Given the 3,819,1925 acres covering major crops, this means 
on average 1 extension worker covers 5,081 acres.  In addition, extension outreach was geared mostly towards paddy; 
second, farm management is poor.  Farmers have weak knowledge about the appropriate application of production 
technologies such as fertilizers, seed varieties, and pesticides; and third, agricultural research is underfunded, fragmented, 
and suffers from weak human resource capacity.   

                                            
8 World Bank 2017. Myanmar Agricultural Public Expenditure Review. Increasing the impact of public spending on agricultural growth. WB/LIFT.  
9 “Current Status of Agricultural Extension in Myanmar”. 2017. MOALI 



 
12. Private sector engagement in agricultural value chains is low. In addition to the constraints mentioned above, 
several other factors are adversely affecting the private sector’s full participation in agricultural value chain development.  
Infrastructure challenges such as post-harvest storage and cold chain facilities, and testing laboratories restricts them 
from contributing to the downstream side of the value chain.  Poor accreditation of services geared towards the regional 
and global export markets is also a constraint. 
 
13. Climate variability and extreme weather events have also significantly impacted performance of the agricultural 
sector.  In 2012, Myanmar was ranked the country most at-risk to climate shocks within Asia-Pacific, due to the wide range 
of hazards including, floods, cyclones, earthquakes, landslides, and tsunamis.  In addition, it ranks 2 out of 187 countries 
in the Global Climate Risk Index.  However, there are regions and states that are more vulnerable than others.  In 2015-
2016 ENSO event and the accompanying drought in the Central Dry Area decreased production and export of traditional 
crops such as sesame, beans and pulses.  Overall the drought from El Niño affected more than 15 million people in the 
Delta and Dry areas affecting livelihood, food access, decreased productivity and farmer income. 
 
14. Improving nutritional status of Myanmar’s population remains a significant challenge.  Rice continues to be the 
key staple crop consumed in Myanmar.  However, rice lacks nutritional value in terms of the minerals and vitamins typically 
found in a meal with dietary diversity.  A 195-gram serving of long grain cooked brown rice provides 11% of the 
recommended daily calorie value and provides no vitamin A, C or D intake, has only 5% of recommended daily iron value, 
2% of daily calcium and no vitamin B12 value10.  In addition, sufficient knowledge on dietary intake is lacking, especially 
among the rural population.  One way to tackle this challenge is to promote agricultural diversification and increase the 
knowledge of rural households about dietary diversity and importance for improved health outcomes, and productivity. 
 
15. Despite the significant sector challenges, Myanmar’s agriculture has ample potential for growth and rural 
poverty reduction.  Myanmar has abundant natural resources, youthful workforce, and diverse faming systems.  Myanmar 
is the world’s second largest exporter of beans and pulses (after Canada) and the largest exporter in the ASEAN region.  
For example, in 2014, the export earnings from beans and pulses was $835 million (exported to India, Thailand, 
Bangladesh, China, and UAE) which is higher than the export value of rice valued at $630 million during the same year.  In 
addition, urbanization and income growth amongst segments of the population are translating into changing dietary 
preferences and food spending patterns.  All these developments are expected to accelerate and expose enormous 
opportunities for farmers, and private sector across all segments of the value chain, and overall sectoral growth. 
 
16. Leveraging agriculture for sector growth and rural poverty reduction is a top government priority, and this is 
recognized in the 2017 Agriculture Development Strategy (ADS).  The ADS accept limitations of past approaches to ensure 
food security for promoting agricultural transformation and rural poverty reduction.  The strategy identified three priority 
areas requiring support: (i) Governance; (ii) Productivity; and (iii) Market Linkages and Competitiveness.   
 
17. The 2018 Myanmar Sustainable Development Plan (MSDP) recognized the agriculture sector challenges and 
proposed action plans.  The MSDP recognizes the high dependence of Myanmar’s economy on agriculture and its 
significance for poverty reduction, as noted under “Pillar 2: Prosperity & Partnership”. Under this Pillar, “Strategy 3.1: 
Creating a diverse and productive economy with rural development and agriculture as the foundation” stresses on 
addressing Myanmar’s low productivity to support value chain development, increase private sector participation and 
eventually boost agricultural competitiveness.  
 

                                            
10 “Crop Diversification and Nutrition”. 2014. Partners.  



Relationship to CPF 
 
18. The proposed project is aligned to the 2015-2017 World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and the 
two years extended partnership framework. Rural poverty reduction is outlined as a focus area with several objectives, 
including increased productivity in farming and agribusiness, and addressing critical infrastructure and service gaps for the 
rural poor.  The extended CPF continues its support for rural poverty reduction through rural growth. 
 
19. Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned with the identified pathways for poverty reduction as outlined in 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD).  The SCD identified improvements in agricultural productivity as necessary for 
poverty reduction and as an opportunity for short term gains.  The SCD recognizes the immense potential for 
improvement in Myanmar by addressing yield gaps, diversification, and value-addition. 

 
20. The proposed project is also aligned with the World Bank’s Twin Goals.  The proposed project activities are 
intended to increase the income of the rural poor and generate shared prosperity by building the capacity and knowledge 
of farmers to undertake enhanced farming practices that increases the resilience of their diversified farming systems as 
well as increase their agricultural competitiveness.   

 
21. This proposed project concept has benefited substantially from ongoing and completed analytical and 
investment activities.  The experience from the ongoing Agriculture Development Support Project (ADSP) in project 
management and implementation (fiduciary aspects), and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements will be used 
extensively for the proposed NAFSP.  Successful instruments of the ADSP such as Project Working committees (PWCs) 
that meets bi-monthly to improve collaboration and monitoring across participating departments and divisions and 
implementation through existing MOALI decentralized bodies such as Agricultural Consultative Committees (ACCs) at 
district and village track levels will be applied to this project.   

 
22. Insights on the status of Myanmar’s agriculture sector performance were drawn from two recent completely 

analytical activities.  The first study is “Myanmar: Analysis of Farm Production Economics”. This was funded by LIFT 

(Livelihood and Food Security Trust Fund) to address existing agriculture data constraints using a 2013/2014 Myanmar 

Agricultural Survey of 1,728 farm households in four regions/states across three Agro-ecological Zones (AEZs) in 

Myanmar: (i) Ayeyarwady and Bago (Delta AEZ), Sagaing (Dry AEZ), and Shan (Hills and Mountains AEZ).  The study did 

not cover the Coastal AEZ.  The survey covers crops produced during two main seasons i.e., monsoon and dry seasons. A 

follow-up survey is currently ongoing to assess changes in farming practices since the 2013/2014 survey.  The second 

study this concept note benefited from is the “Myanmar Agriculture Public Expenditure Review”.  Several insights on the 

status of Myanmar’s food system were highlighted during the recent “Workshop on Modern Food Systems in Myanmar” 

(February 2018).  The workshop discussions noted the ongoing challenges and opportunities for the development of 

Myanmar’s food systems, and these were captured in this concept note.   

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
 
23. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to, “increase productivity of select high value commodities, enhance 
agricultural diversification and competitiveness, and diet diversity in selected agro-ecological zones of Myanmar”.  This 
will be achieved through the provision of key public goods and services that will facilitate and further enhance the 
engagement of (and with) the private sector. 
 


Key Results (From PCN) 
 
24. The key results of the proposed project are: 

 
i. Increase in production volume and yields of selected commodities 

ii. Change in agricultural land productivity of targeted farmers supported by the project (percentage) 
iii. Increase in sales of farm produce as a share of production among targeted farmers supported by the project 

(percentage, disaggregated by gender male- and FHHs) 
iv. Increase in efficiency of processing facilities supported by the project (percentage) 
v. Increase in linkages between producers and buyers 

vi. Increase in dietary composition of targeted households (percentage, disaggregated by gender) 
 

 
25. The key project beneficiaries are: (i) smallholders in four agro-ecological zones (Dry, Delta, Hills and Mountains, 

and Coastal); (ii) extension workers; (iii) agricultural researchers; (iv) buyers for value chain development; (v) MOALI 

departments and units participating in the project. 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
1. Once the priority agro-ecological zones and high value / potential commodities and value chains are determined, 
the proposed project will adopt the “Theory of Change” and “Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) for Agricultural 
Value-Chains” frameworks for the identification and selection of project activities within each component and 
subcomponents.   
 
2. The proposed project areas and interventions will be made with close consideration provided to the following: (i) 
promotion of improved nutritional outcomes; (ii) inclusiveness of minorities and other marginalized groups; and iii) 
implementation in conflict and non-conflict areas.   

 
3. The proposed project is envisaged to have the following three components (with interventions tailored to the 
specific context of the selected commodities / value chains): 

 
4. Component 1: Development of Value Chains (US$ 20 million) – The objective of this component will be to support 
mechanisms by which public sector services are improved in collaboration with the private sector where opportunities 
exist to promote the development of selected agricultural commodity value chains, innovative modalities to better link 
farmers to markets, and improvements in the enabling environment for agro-enterprise.  This component will explore 
opportunities (including pilots) for private sector engagement on capacity strengthening to add value for key commodities, 
provision of equipment and infrastructure using out-grower schemes, and matching funds for farmer organizations and 
commodity specific associations.  This component will also include improvements in the enabling regulatory / legal 
environment for agro-enterprise (support to farm inputs and products) including food quality and food safety.  The 
infrastructure investment needs based on business plans and cost sharing mechanisms may include, (i) product collection 
centers, (ii) drying facilities, (iii) post-harvest storage structures, (iv) micro irrigation; (v) improved information technology 
service facilities, (vi) cold chain facilities, and (vii) facilitating a conducive policy environment, among others. 

 
5. Component 2: On-farm Agricultural Investment Support (US$74 million) – This component has two sub-
components: (i) On-farm Infrastructure Investments (US$54 million) and (ii) Agricultural Support Services (US$20 million).  



The objective of the first sub-component is to improve the production volume of selected commodities and crop 
diversification by providing support for infrastructure investments in priority farming systems.  The activities may include 
upgrading/constructing of critical infrastructure for increased productivity, crop diversification and/or competitiveness 
such as in existing and new research/ experimental stations, seed multiplication farms, laboratory buildings and 
equipment, border post quarantine and testing service centers; irrigation systems on-farm/ downstream; and 
decentralized training centers / information centers.  Capacity building related to optimizing infrastructure investments 
and operation and maintenance will also be included.  This sub-component will prioritize infrastructure investments in 
high-value commodities and areas where the level of engagement of the private sector is low or nonexistent.  The 
objective of the second sub-component is to ensure and enhance the provision of key public agricultural services such as 
agricultural research and innovation, extension services, institutional development and farmer training.  This component 
will provide capacity building and policy support to the national agriculture research and extension system with the aim 
to improve service delivery in the agriculture sector.  This component will also focus on services related to on-farm 
management practices which will include the adoption of climate smart production practices, crop diversification, and 
integration of nutritional and gender-sensitive activities. 
 
6. Component 3: Project Management (US$ 6 million) - The objective of this component is to ensure effective 
project management.  This component will support carrying out of the day-to-day project management activities, including 
project administration and implementation, procurement, financial management and audit, social and environmental 
safeguards (including peace and inclusion filters, marginalized/vulnerable population groups, gender etc.), and monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E). 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
At concept stage, location for project interventions have not been determined.  
 
Myanmar is characterized by its central lowlands along the Ayeyarwady river, which flows from north to south through 

the Central Burma Basin and ends in a wide delta. These areas are its well-established agricultural production areas, 
which the current Agricultural Development Support Project (ADSP) (P147626) supports. The Central Valley Region is 
bordered by steep, rugged highlands in the north, the Arakan Mountains in the west and the Shan Hills, Karen Hills and 
Tenasserim Hills to the east. As a result, physical characteristics vary significantly across the country, as well as ethnic, 
social and cultural characteristics. 
 
Once project locations are identified, further information will be provided. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Under the current ADSP project, the project management has hired one environmental and one social safeguards 

consultant, who have the skills and experience to manage the environmental and social risks of the project. The project 
management unit overall has been gaining knowledge and experience on World Bank safeguards policies and their 
implementation. However, without the consultants, the project management unit does not have dedicated staff who has 
backgrounds and experience in environmental and social risk management. As a part of the project’s environmental and 
social management framework (ESMF) preparation, a capacity need assessment will be conducted to identify areas for 
improvement and measures to increased capacities. 




 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Martin Fodor, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Vivianti Rambe, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project will focus on activities that (i) 
improve farm management and value chain 
development which include upgrading testing 
laboratories and upgrading/building post-harvest 
storage and cold chain facilities; (ii) strengthening 
capacities of agricultural extension officers and 
researchers; (iii) improve farm management which 
includes support of seed multiplication and 
procurement and distribution of seeds and seedlings 
as well as supply of biological control; and (iv) ensure 
effective project management. 
 
Under Component 1, the proposed project will fund 
specific investments on infrastructure for improved 
farm management such as (i) research, ((ii) seed farms, 
(iii) national service laboratories, (iv) off-site and on-
site service and testing laboratories and centers, (v) 
border post quarantine and testing centers, and (vi) 
training centers and other high priority infrastructure 
to support improved farm management in selected 
agro-ecological zones.  
 
The project will also fund infrastructure for value chain 
development such as (i) product collection centers, (ii) 
drying facilities, (iii) post-harvest storage structures, 
(iv) improved information technology service facilities 
and (v) cold chain facilities intended to support 
downstream agricultural value chain development. 
 
Main potential environmental impacts are related to 
construction activities, maintenance and operation of 
the post-harvest storage and cold chain facilities (e.g. 
hygiene, reliable and adequate water and power 
supply). In regards to seed farms, waste management 
on the use of polythene plant bags for 
seedlings/nursery will be the main issue.  

Main potential social risks are related to land 
acquisition, contested land ownership and land 
conflict, and potential exclusion of ethnic minorities, 
landless farmers, women-headed households or other 
vulnerable groups. Any social assessment conducted 
during preparation or implementation will cover these 
social risks.  
 
Project target provinces and states are yet to be 
determined; therefore an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared. The 
Framework will include the following: 
 
1. Guidance for screening of subprojects, 
ensuring that relevant safeguard policies (natural 
habitats, forests, and projects in disputed areas) are 
adequately addressed.  
 
2. Assessment of environmental and social 
impacts of various activities related to Component 1 
and Component 3. Component 2 of the proposed 
project will focus on capacity building. The component 
will incorporate technical inputs from the safeguards 
specialists into TA’s Terms of References to ensure 
safeguards aspects are mainstreamed. 
 
3. Details on the type, level and depth of 
environmental and social impact assessments 
(SAs/EMPs/SOPs/ECoPs) required for each of the 
investments/activities. 
 
4. Environment Health and Safety (EHS) 
Guidelines for reference as a generic environmental 
management plan, particularly for construction 
related activities. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP), particularly on the following issues: 
construction related activities, maintenance and 
operation (hygiene, reliable and adequate water and 
power supply) issues related to the post-harvest 
storage and cold chain facilities (Component 1), and 
waste management on the use of polythene plant 
bags for seedlings/nursery as well as implication of the 


supply of biological control as part of the integrated 
pest and disease management (Component 3). 
 
Overall, the proposed project is expected to deliver a 
number of environmental benefits, such as improved 
soil and water management practices considering the 
agro-ecological context of the project intervention 
area. The project will also contribute to an integrated 
pest and disease management through the adoption 
of sustainable practices by supplying biological 
controls; the use of natural enemies to manage 
population of pest organisms.  
 
Considering the type of investments and activities, 
scale of the proposed project, as well as the nature 
and magnitude of its potential impacts, an 
environmental Category B operation is proposed. 
 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered to ensure that any affected 
natural habitats are adequately protected, because 
some of the project sites may take place near parks or 
protected areas. The proposed project’s ESMF will 
screen out and exclude any subprojects that would 
involve clearing of new land for agriculture. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The proposed project’s ESMF will screen out and 
exclude any clearing or effects on forest lands. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered as a precaution, because 
pesticide use is a necessity in agricultural activities in 
the region. The ESMF will promote Integrated Pest 
Management as standard practice. A screening 
mechanism will be included in the ESMF to determine 
if there are any sub-projects or activities with 
significant pest management issues; if so, then a 
separate Pest Management Plan will be required to 
ensure that these materials are well managed for 
those subprojects and/or activities. 
 
Under Component 3, the proposed project will fund an 
integrated pest and disease management which will 
support the adoption of sustainable pest and disease 
management practices by supplying biological 
controls; the use of natural enemies to manage 
population of pest organisms. The ESMF will provide 

more detailed information on the application of this 
method. 
 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered to ensure that any “chance 
finds” or other physical cultural resources during 
excavation or other earth-moving activities are 
adequately protected. Project’s ESMF will consist of a 
chance find procedure which requires that should any 
areas of potential cultural importance or artefacts be 
identified, works should stop and the government 
related agencies (to be identified at appraisal stage) 
should be contacted. No work should continue until 
approval has been sought from these agencies. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Myanmar is one of the most ethnically diverse 
countries in Asia, and the project will likely fund sub-
projects where ethnic minorities are present. Both 
under Component 1 (rehabilitation and construction 
of infrastructure) and Component 2 (formation of 
farmer groups), there may be risks that ethnic 
minorities do not have equal and culturally 
appropriate access to benefits, and may not be 
adequately consulted in decision making. 
 
Since project sites are not known at this time, MoA 
will prepare an IPPF as part of the ESMF in order to 
ensure that in sub-projects are screened for ethnic 
minorities, and sub-project areas where ethnic 
minorities are present, MoE will conduct a social 
assessment and ensure that free, prior and informed 
consultations are held to reach broad community 
support. If target project locations are identified 
during preparation, a social assessment will be 
prepared by appraisal, and free, prior and informed 
consultations will be held. If locations and location-
specific activities are not identified during preparation 
and this is left to project implementation, the social 
assessments under the current ADSP project will be 
combined and updated as an assessment of social risks 
in the agriculture sector, specific to the new project 
activities. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Rehabilitation and construction of test laboratories, 
post-harvest storage units and cold chain facilities are 
not expected to result in significant land acquisition 
impacts, especially since siting should be flexible for 

construction of new facilities. The impacts should be 
moderate and manageable. 
 
Since siting of sub-projects is not known at this time, 
MoA will prepare a RPF in order to ensure that sub-
projects are screened for land acquisition, and 
appropriate plans are prepared in cases where land 
acquisition is necessary. The RPF will also include 
protocols for voluntary land donation. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD 

The project will not finance construction of new dams, 
however, it is yet to be determined during project 
preparation whether it will include repairs / 
maintenance / rehabilitation  of existing dams in which 
case the dam safety measures would be applied. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

Project target provinces and states are yet to be 
determined. ESMF will cover the provision of OP/BP 
7.50 should project preparation discussions determine 
that the locations or activities subject to the policy are 
within the international waterway. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The proposed project’s ESMF will screen out and 
exclude any projects in disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 10, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
MoALI- Department of Agriculture will prepare an ESMF, including a pest management plan, IPPF and RPF, before 

appraisal. If target project locations are identified during preparation, a social assessment will be prepared by appraisal, 
and free, prior and informed consultations will be held. If locations and location-specific activities are not identified 
during preparation and this is left to project implementation, the social assessments under the current ADSP project will 
be combined and updated as an assessment of social risks in the agriculture sector, specific to the new project activities. 
These will be disclosed and consulted on after being cleared by the Bank. These instruments will be informed by the 
documentation and implementation experience of the on-going Agriculture Development Support Project (ADSP). 
 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
State of Maharashtra's Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project (P168310) 

 
 

  
Sep 18, 2018 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25483 
     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P168310  State of Maharashtra's 
Agribusiness and Rural 
Transformation Project 
(P168310) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA May 13, 2019 Aug 12, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Department of Agriculture, 
Government of Maharashtra 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to support the development of inclusive and competitive agriculture value chains , 
focusing on small holder farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in Maharashtra. This would be achieved by expanding access 
to new and organised markets for producers and enterprises with complementary investments in technical services and 
risk management capabilities. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 300.00 

Total Financing 300.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 210.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 210.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 80.00 

          Borrowing Agency 80.00 



     Other Sources 10.00 

          Foundation/s (identified) 10.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. India continues to be one of the world’s fastest-growing large economies and has experienced a substantial 
decline in poverty. The Indian economy’s annual growth rate grew from 5.5 per cent in 2012-13 to 8 per cent in 2015-
16, supported by robust private consumption, a resilient services sector, and some revival in industrial activity. In recent 
times, temporary disruptions from demonetization and uncertainty surrounding GST slowed India’s economic 
momentum; real GDP growth declined to 7.1 per cent in 2016-17 and further to 6.5 per cent in 2017-18. Private 
investments have remained subdued. Economic activity is expected to stabilise in 2018-19 and growth will resume 
gradual acceleration in the near term. Since the 2000s, India has made remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty, 
declining sharply from 38.9 to 21.6 per cent at the international poverty line (US$1.90 PPP/day) between 2004 and 2011. 
With over a 100 million people escaping poverty, the pace of poverty reduction in India exceeded that of the developing 
world as well as that of Middle-Income Countries (MICs) in this period. High economic growth, a rapid rise in rural wages, 
greater rural-urban integration and increase in non-farm activity, especially construction, were the key drivers of poverty 
reduction. Since 2011, robust economic growth may have aided further reduction in poverty. However, trends in the 
construction sector and rural wages suggest that the pace of poverty reduction may have moderated.  

 
2. Agriculture plays a vital role in India’s economy and is central to policies aimed at alleviating poverty. 
Increasingly, the potential role of the sector to expand growth, create jobs and support the ongoing rural-urban 
transformation is becoming evident. More than 54 per cent of the population is engaged in agriculture and allied 
activities (census 2011), and the sector contributed 17.1 per cent to the country’s Gross Value Added (GVA) for the year 
2017-18 (at current prices). As expected in a fast-growing economy, there has been a continuous decline in the share of 
agriculture and allied Sectors in the GVA from 18.6 per cent in 2013-14 to 17.4 per cent in 2016-17. The annual agriculture 
growth rate was around 3-3.5 per cent in the 1990s and 2000s and dropped 3below 2 per cent per annum during 2013-
15, due to low productivity, growing water and land scarcity, rising labour costs, and declining commodity prices. This 



 

has led to an agrarian crisis with a growing emphasis on improving the ecological sustainability of the resource base and 
the socio-economic potential of the sector to increase farmer welfare and rural growth opportunities1. 

 
3. Rapid urbanisation in India is driving change in the agriculture value chain, deepening linkages between urban 
food systems and producers. This urbanisation leads to (i) an increased uptake of agricultural produce from rural to 
urban areas; (ii) changes in the farm production to reflect the food marketed and consumed; and (iii) larger and changing 
role of food supply chains in meeting urban food needs2. However, the current urban food system is in disarray with 
limited or no focus on food safety, food security to urban poor and multiplicity of authorities handling food related issues. 
 
4. Over the years India has developed export competitiveness in certain specialised products, making it the 
world’s 10th largest agriculture exporter.  Leading exports consisted of basmati rice, the meat of bovine animals, marine 
products, cotton, and sugar. However, India’s agriculture export basket accounts for only about 2 per cent of world trade. 
and the share of India’s high value and value-added agriculture produce in its agriculture export basket is less than 15 
per cent compared to 25 per cent in the US and 49 per cent in China.  This low share and low value are contributed mainly 
by (i) inconsistent policies in the areas of farm production, support prices and R&D (all focused on food security); (ii) poor 
inland transportation, exit point infrastructure; and (iii) export restrictions which results in uncertainty among the 
stakeholders. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
5. Maharashtra has a high agricultural growth rate, agricultural transformation toward higher value crops is 
underway, and the state is relatively integrated into global commodity markets.Agriculture has grown at an annual 
average of 6.4 per cent from 2004-05 to 2011-12, and the area under cultivation for cereals has declined since 2000, 
reflecting a shift from food grains towards cash crops. Food grains (rice, wheat, and millets, excluding maize) account for 
about 25 per cent of the gross cropped area, contributing only 7. 7 per cent of agricultural GDP3.  Since 2000, with the 
upsurge in the production of high-value crops, the state has emerged as one of the country’s largest producers and 
exporter of fruits, vegetables, pulses, cotton, and soybean. Many of these changes in the sector have led to positive 
developments because production is labour intensive (e.g., horticulture and floriculture), climate resilient (pulse-based 
cropping systems increase resilience, e.g. pigeon pea intercropping leads to higher soil carbon sequestration than 
monocrop system), and responds to market needs, both domestically and globally.  The food processing industry is 
dynamic in the state with increasing value addition, and it employs approximately 240,000 workers, about 15 per cent of 
the total formal sector employment. However, agriculture growth and structural transformation are not spread evenly 
across the state with some areas, notably the north and east, lagging behind.  Likewise, around 57 per cent of all industries 
are concentrated in only three districts4.  
 
6.  Small and marginal farmers5 dominate Maharashtra's agriculture and commodity downturns significantly 
impact them as the state’s agriculture is diversified and relatively integrated with the global value chains. Commodities 
like soybean, cotton, and sugar (covering 44 per cent of the cropped area in Maharashtra) are strongly influenced by 
global price movements. Commodities with little footprint outside India are mainly influenced by trade policies. For 
example, over the past few years, the price of pulses (where pulses cover about 20 percent of the total cropped area in 

                                            
1 Annual Report, 2017-18. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare, Government of India 
2 India is the fifth largest online grocery market in the Asia Pacific region and one of the fastest growing.  India’s online food and drink market grew to $135 million in 
2016 and is expected to cross $464 million in 2021. Likewise, the emergence of larger chains and stores which began around 2005 and has grown to over 3,000 modern 
retail outlets in 2016. 
3 Economic Survey of Maharashtra, 2017-18, GOM. 
4 A Report Based on ASI 2010-11, GOM. 
5 With average farm size of 1.44 ha. 


Maharashtra), while influenced by domestic consumption, were largely affected by the inconsistent trade policies of 
India. This is reflected in periodic farm distress in sectors linked to domestic and global markets, with broad shifts in the 
global prices of commodities such as pulses, soybean, sugar and milk leading to farmers not even being able to cover the 
cost of production in many cases. 
 
7. In response to these emerging production and market-related challenges, the Government of India (GOI) and 
Government of Maharashtra (GOM) have launched a number of programs, policies, and reform initiatives under the 
overarching vision of “Doubling Farmer’s Income by 2022”. New initiatives to address the production risks include a 
crop insurance scheme with enhanced coverage and use of technology; and a dedicated long-term irrigation fund with 
an initial tranche of US$3 billion. Additionally, to liberalise the regulated agriculture market, the GOI launched, and GOM 
adopted, second-generation marketing reforms, including the move towards integrating the country into a unified 
national market; and 100 per cent Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is allowed to enhance investments in agribusiness/food 
processing sectors. A new agricultural export policy is in the final stages of approval and proposes doing away with 
arbitrary export quotas, and price restrictions.  Through this policy, India is targeting a doubling of agriculture exports to 
4.00 per cent (US$ 60 billion) by 2022.  
 
8. Women face a number of additional barriers to the transition to high value agriculture (HVA) and agribusiness. 
While India’s farmers are increasingly likely to be women, they are less able to transition to HVA than men, and their 
ownership of agricultural assets has stagnated. Unlike men who, in addition to production, also serve as the actors in the 
upper levels of the value chains, including intermediaries or village-level traders and processors, wholesalers, retailers, 
or exporters, women are generally concentrated at the lower levels of the value chains. This division of labour is mostly 
a reflection of social and cultural norms, which discourage women to travel by themselves or own land. These factors 
curtail women’s access to resources and services, including credit, training, extension, inputs, and trading and marketing 
networks. Women do not have collateral to apply for loan or opportunities to participate in extension training because 
selection for these opportunities is often based on land ownership titles or other formal records. More than 2 million 
poor women have been mobilised into Self Help Groups (SHGs) and federated organisations in the state.    These SHGs 
and federated organisations can serve as an important pillar to substantially enhance inclusion of rural poor women into 
agribusiness transformation and related entrepreneurship opportunities.   
 
9. The state also faces significant adverse risks from climate change:   As part of the National Action Plan on Climate 
Change (NAPCC), the Government of Maharashtra has formulated the Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on 
Climate Change (MSAAPCC) by commissioning a comprehensive vulnerability assessment study. The MSAAPCC climate 
modelling results for 2030, 2050 and 2070, show that temperature and rainfall are projected to increase across the state, 
with important regional variations resulting in potentially significant adverse impacts on agriculture performance. 
Impacts will be further aggravated by the projected increase in the frequency of extreme climate events (droughts, 
hailstorms, floods, delays in the onset of monsoons, higher rainfall intensity) already experienced in the state over recent 
past, as illustrated by the three severe droughts that hit the state over the past five years. Given these uncertain shifts in 
weather and climatic events, the small and marginal farmers are disproportionately exposed to risk and farm distress. 
 
10. With the support of the World Bank, Maharashtra has recently rolled out four programs, to enhance the climate 
resiliency of the state’s agriculture: the Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture, and three national level 
programs that have significant presence in the state: the National Dairy Support Project (P107648), the National 
Groundwater Management Improvement Program (P158119) and the proposed Agriculture Risk Resilience Insurance 
Access Project (P165923). Their focus is on enhancing climate resilience of farmers through promoting adoption of 
climate-resilient agricultural technologies, irrigation and production risk management. The proposed project will seek to 
complement and leverage these Bank financed projects/programs and other thematically related on-going/pipeline 



projects and initiatives both nationally and in the state viz., National Rural Economic Transformation Project (P104164), 
the proposed Food Processing and Value Addition Pilot Program (P167559). 
 
Relationship to CPF 

 
11. The project advances two focus areas of the India CPF of promoting more resource efficient growth and enhancing 
competitiveness and creating jobs. Specifically, the project will support the following CPF goals: 

 
12. Objective 1.1: Promote more resource-efficient, inclusive, and diversified growth in the rural sector. The project 
closely aligns to the CPF sectoral goal of supporting Government of India (GOI) priorities of agricultural transformation 
and doubling farmer incomes by 2022. The project seeks to undertake a range of interventions to enhance market access, 
competitiveness and resilience to market shocks of farmers and value chain actors in the state of Maharashtra. The 
project will seek to generate jobs in agribusiness related areas including input supply, provision of technical services and 
food processing. The project will also explicitly target and develop mechanisms for inclusion of women at all level of 
agricultural transformation, from diversification to higher value crops, to access to higher level technical services, and 
access to a broader range of markets. This will promote inclusivity and diversification of the rural growth. With its strategy 
to align with complimentary investments under other projects and schemes, the project will also advance resource 
efficient growth and build climate resilience of farmers. 

 
13. Objective 2.1: Improve the business environment and select firm capabilities. The project will support the GOM’s 
efforts to develop a more favourable regulatory environment for private investment in agribusiness related areas, 
promote private sector investments and enhance the competitiveness of the agricultural sector. This will include support 
for the improved implementation of reforms already undertaken; setting up of institutional structures for consultative 
planning and capacity building of identified value chains and growth clusters, and provision of technical services to 
agribusiness enterprises.  .  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
14. The project development objective is to support the development of inclusive and competitive agriculture value 
chains6, focusing on small holder farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in Maharashtra.     
 
B. Key Results 

a) Increased access to new and organised markets (gender disaggregated, with a target for increased access for 
women producers/value chain participants); (measured by increase in the value of marketed output at the 
beneficiary level); 

b) Beneficiaries of job-focused interventions (CRI) (gender disaggregated); (measured by the number of beneficiaries 
reached by training, employment in processing, entrepreneurial development and other interventions that 
contribute to the jobs agenda); and 

c) Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (CRI) (gender disaggregated). 
 
15. Project beneficiaries include producers, community-based organisations (viz., SHG federations, Farmer Producer 
Organisations, and Primary Agriculture Credit Cooperative Societies), agri enterprises and other value chain participants, 
including individuals where relevant. 
 
D. Concept Description 

                                            
6 Competitive value chains are defined as those providing project beneficiaries with access to services, markets, and jobs. 




 
16. The proposed project will strengthen and speed up ongoing agricultural systems transformation in the state of 
Maharashtra. The project will support the state in strengthening the continuing market-driven transition, with an 
expanded private sector role in the production, processing, and value addition, commercialisation of crops, and livestock 
products. With a substantial urban population – the highest in the country; relatively high per capita incomes – third 
highest in the country; and the highest industrialisation level amongst states, Maharashtra is well placed for such 
agricultural sector transformation. The proposed project will support the following pillars of agriculture and rural 
transformation in the state:  

 
(a) Build state capacity for evidence-based agribusiness reforms. The state has undertaken many agriculture market 

reforms and plans to do more to address market-distorting interventions and bottlenecks for private sector activity.   
The project will seek to build capacity of the state to inform on how reform issues are debated, decided, implemented 
and evaluated; and develop institutional mechanisms for coordination with the private sector.  

(b) Expand market access. Constraints to producers and entrepreneurs accessing emerging domestic and export markets 
include lack of access to technical services relating to food safety and quality; weak information on market 
opportunities and requirements; and inability to invest in market development activities.  The project will seek to 
improve access of producers and entrepreneurs to a range of technical and business development services to 
enhance competitiveness through food safety and quality; new technologies; and skills training. International 
experience shows that accessing new markets requires longer-term strategic actions including identifying 
opportunity based on local competitive advantages and supply-demand projections; and support for firms and 
entrepreneurs to undertake market development. The project will support a range of such activities including: 
identifying opportunity commodities and value chains for interventions; scaling up production and processing of 
identified commodities; enhancing access to timely market information and intelligence; and supporting producer 
and enterprise associations to undertake market access activities.  

(c) Strengthen risk mitigation measures. The project will support strengthening risk mitigation measures including 
building the capacity of the state to respond to commodity-price fluctuations and agriculture sector crises; 
developing access to timely information on markets and productions trends; and enhancing access of producers to 
financing and hedging instruments. Additionally, for building the climate resiliency and resource growth, the project 
will align with complimentary investments under other projects and schemes. 

 
17. In addressing these constraints, the project will support  a number of actions for leveraging additional resources 
by (i) improving the policy and regulatory environment for private sector investments in the agricultural sector; (ii) using 
public financing to enhance private sector incentives and to reduce transaction costs and risks  ; (iii) forging innovative 
partnerships for leveraging funding, including Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funding through the Village Social 
Transformation Foundation (VSTF), a foundation promoted by the GOM, with private sector participation and financing, 
to catalyze rural transformation. 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Maharashtra is one of India’s most prosperous states, with a population of 114 million. Yet, it has some of India’s poorest 

people, four of its 36 districts are among India’s 106 most backward. Agriculture and industry form the mainstay of the 
state's economy. Most of the cultivable land is still rain-fed, relying heavily on the southwest monsoon rains. The net 
irrigated area is only 30.77 million Ha or about 16% of cultivable land. Maharashtra has typical monsoon climate, with 
cold weather seasons. The state has been affected by the recurrent monsoon failures in recent years 
resulting in droughts which have disproportionately impacted the state’s semi-arid agro climatic zones. Sahyadri and 
Satpura are two important hill ranges and Godavari, Bhima and Krishna are the two major rivers of the state. The state 
also has a long coastline. About 17% area of the state is forest, majority of which are in the eastern and Sahyadri regions 
of the state. Since the central parts of the state receives low rainfall, most of the rivers in the region have multiple dams. 
Maharashtra has around 1800 notable large dams. Maharashtra is generally rich in biodiversity Southern Tropical Thorn 
with five major forest types (Southern Tropical Semi-Evergreen, Southern Tropical Moist Deciduous, Southern Tropical 
Dry Deciduous, Southern Tropical Thorn and Littoral and Swamp Forests). The Western Ghats areas of Maharashtra are 
included in the 34 global Biodiversity Hotspots. The proposed project will be implemented throughout the state. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The Borrower is familiar with the World Bank's safeguard policies having implemented several Bank funded projects. 

More recently, in the agriculture sector, Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project (MACP) and Project on Climate 
Resilient Agriculture (PoCRA) are being implemented. Both have sound environmental and social management 
frameworks. MACP has been rated Satisfactory on safeguards performance consistently. There is now adequate capacity 
in the state to manage potential safeguard risks of projects. However, some capacity building efforts are needed to deal 
with the new set of challenges arising as a result of climate change impacts. In general, Maharashtra has good institutions 
that can prove technical support to deal with safeguards related impacts, risks and challenges and build on positive 
outcomes of resource efficiency and sustainability. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Anupam Joshi, Environmental Specialist 
Gitanjali Chaturvedi, Social Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

This policy is triggered. The project involves a series of 
interventions on agriculture value chain development, 
facilitating market access, supporting improvement of 
livestock productivity, food processing and, in general, 
enhancing resilience.  It is anticipated that 
investments to be made under the project will not 
lead to any major irreversible impacts. the project by 
design promotes market-led better natural resource 
and environmental management within the selected 
sectors and sub-sectors. The potential environmental 
issues that could arise if project financed investments 
are not implemented appropriately, include food 
safety, supply chain sustainability, waste generation 
and management, poor energy efficiency and 
associated emissions, soil degradation etc. Activities 
for post-harvest management and value chain creation 
for product aggregation, handling, and marketing 


could have impacts associated with general civil works 
construction, if supported under the project. This 
includes appropriate site selection for creating new 
infrastructure and reducing impacts of construction 
related activities like debris disposal, dust and solid 
wastes. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

TBD 

This policy may/may not be triggered. At this stage it is 
not clear if investments in enhancing the access of 
intended project beneficiaries to private markets will 
trigger this policy. The project investments may result 
in increased role of private markets and attract private 
investments in food processing etc. The proposed EA 
will ascertain whether this policy will be triggered. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 

This policy may/may not be triggered. Project 
investments are not likely to adversely impact natural 
habitats but certain elements may have some bearing 
on agro-biodiversity. The EA will ascertain whether 
this policy will be triggered. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project will not lead to any impact on forests or 
their management practices. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Even through the project is not going to invest on the 
crop production side of agriculture, this policy is 
triggered as opportunities created through better 
market access could lead to overuse of pesticides and 
other agro-chemicals for boosting production. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
The project is unlikely to have any impact on physical 
cultural resources. Proposed investments are largely in 
existing markets and/or rural household level. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Project activities will be implemented state-wide. 
Given that Maharashtra has a large tribal population 
spread across the state with 54% of those living below 
poverty line, OP 4.10 has been triggered. As specific 
locations for the project are unknown, an Indigenous 
People's Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared 
after free, prior and informed consultation with 
affected Scheduled Tribes as per OP 4.10 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 TBD 
Project activities currently envisaged are not likely to 
cause any involuntary resettlement. This will be 
updated during preparation. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not invest on constructing any new 
dam and/or support rehabilitation/improvement of 
any existing dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not involve any international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project does not include any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Apr 08, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguard preparation will involve undertaking an Environment Assessment. The preparation timeline is aligned with 

project processing timeline. In addition, an Indigenous People's Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared to take into 
account initiatives undertaken in areas populated by Scheduled Tribes. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 23-Feb-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24200 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

India P166745 National Rural Economic 
Transformation Project 
(Additional Financing to 
the National Rural 
Livelihoods Project ) 

P104164 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

National Rural Livelihoods Project SOUTH ASIA 23-Feb-2018 20-Apr-2018 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Agriculture Investment Project 
Financing 

DEA National Rural Livelihood 
Mission 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The project development objective is to establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of theruralpoor that 
enable them to increase household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to 
financial andselected public services. 
 

 
Components 

Component 1. Institutional and Human Capacity Development 
Component 2.  State Livelihood Support 
Component 3.  Innovation and Partnership Support 
Component 4.  Project Implementation Support: 

 

Financing (in US$, millions) 
 
FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 500.00 

Total Financing 500.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
 
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 250.00 

     World Bank Lending 250.00 
 



Total Government Contribution 250.00 

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

Partial Assessment (B) 
  
OPS_TABLE_SAFEGUARDS_DEFERRED 
 

  
Decision 

 

B. Introduction and Context 
 

Country Context 
 
1. India continues to be one of the world’s fastest growing large economies and has experienced a 

substantial decline in poverty. The Indian economy registered gradually rising growth from 5.5 
percent in 2012-13 to 8 percent in 2015-16. This was supported by robust private consumption, a 
resilient services sector, and some revival in industrial activity. Since the 2000s, India has made 
remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty. Between 2004 and 2011, poverty declined sharply 
from 38.9 to 21.6 percent at the international poverty line ($1.90 PPP/day). With over a 100 million 
people escaping poverty, the pace of poverty reduction in India exceeded that of the developing world 
as well as that of Middle Income Countries (MICs) in this period. High economic growth, rapid rise in 
rural wages, greater rural-urban integration and increase in non-farm activity, especially construction, 
were the key drivers of poverty reduction. Since 2011, robust economic growth may have aided 
further reduction in poverty. However, trends in the construction sector and rural wages suggest that 
the pace of poverty reduction may have moderated. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
2. Agriculture continues to be important for rural Indians and there are 68 percent of the rural 

population dependent on it for livelihoods and about 49 percent of the labor force works in the 
agricultural sector but paradoxically it contributes only around 10 to 11 % to National gross domestic 
product (GDP). The Government of India’s new agenda of “Doubling Farmer’s Income”, which not only 
emphasizes upon productivity enhancement, intensification and diversification but also on agri-
processing, Agri-logistics, resource use efficiency, agriculture marketing and sustainability could 
possibly transform the Indian Agriculture. The opportunities in the agribusiness sector and local level 
primary value addition are growing with the changing consumer basket and increasing urbanization 
and demand for diversified and nutritious foods. Small producers have the opportunity to directly 
participate in this value chain if they are organized and provided with appropriate infrastructure, 
technology and information support. 



3. Non-farm economy, in recent times, has emerged as an important livelihoods source in rural 
India. A shift away from agriculture toward nonagricultural wage employment and reduced reliance 
on agricultural income has become evident. Non- farm activities contributed 65% rural income in 
2016-17 (Chand, 2017). Diversification into non-farm interventions (both self-employment and 
wage employment) marks the shift from low-productivity jobs to high productivity and it is an 
important pathway for poverty reduction and employment generation. Non-farm rural jobs are 
predominantly in manufacturing, services (including public administration, education, health, 
community, other personal or household services) and trade and transport (including wholesale 
and retail trade, hotels, restaurants, transport, storage and warehousing and communication).  
 

4. The Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India launched the National Rural Livelihood 
Mission in 2011 as its flagship program to enhance rural livelihoods and reduce rural poverty in the 
country. The world bank supported National Rural Livelihoods Project provided intensive support 
to the launch and scale up of the NRLM over the last 7 years. The National Rural Livelihood Mission 
(NRLM) has now been scaled up to o all 29 states of the country.  The intensive approach 
successfully demonstrated by NRLP in around 500 blocks is now being implemented across nearly 
2500 blocks across 29 states through the NRLM program. A total of 45 million rural women are 
currently part of Self-Help Groups and they have cumulatively leveraged nearly 25 billion USD of 
financing from commercial banks since the launch of the NRLM program in 2011.  

 
5. Ministry of Rural Development has subsequently launched two critical programs that aim to 

leverage the National Rural Livelihood Mission and scale up efforts to enhance agriculture incomes 
and on-farm incomes for the rural poor namely the Mahila Kisan Sashiktikaran Program (MKSP ) 
and the Startup Village Entrepreneurship program . The Mahila Kisan Sashaktikaran Pariyojana 
(MKSP) is launched as a sub-component of the Deendayal Antodaya Yojana-NRLM to improve the 
status of women in agriculture, who constitute 33% of the total agricultural labour force, and 
enhance economic opportunities available to them. The program exclusively focus upon small and 
marginal farmers, sustainable agriculture practices and vulnerability reduction. Community 
Resource Persons (CRP) are identified as best practitioners (locally named as Pashu Sakhi, Krishi 
Sakhi etc.) and are instrumental in promoting farm sector livelihoods (agriculture, animal 
husbandry and NTFP), through community to community sharing and learning – as a “proof of 
concept”. The ‘Start-up Village Entrepreneurship Programme’ (SVEP) launched by Government of 
India in 2014-15 aims to promote and support existing rural entrepreneurs by providing bouquet 
of business development services including entrepreneur capacity building, seed & growth capital 
along with handholding support for business development. Currently, the programme is being 
implemented in 47 Blocks across 14 states with support of 5 technical support agencies. Results 
from SVEP and other world bank supported programs to promote SMEs will inform the scaling up 
of enterprise development initiatives to be taken up under NRETP ( NRLP-AF) 

 
6. The Government of India has recently launched Mission Antyodaya to improve the well-being of 10 

million households from 5000 economic clusters (covering around 50,000 Gram Panchayats) by 
addressing multiple dimensions of poverty through convergent actions under wide range of existing 
development schemes and following a saturation approach. The movement of Panchayats away 
from poverty will be tracked through a mobile based application i.e. “Panchayat Darpan” using a 
set of indicators having differential weightage scheme. In a list of 24 indicators, 30% weightage has 
been provided on GP level Infrastructure development; another 30% on Human Development 
outcomes and rest 40% weightage has been given to livelihoods promotion. Mission Antyodaya 
further accelerates economic transformation process building on the NRLP outcomes 



 
7. One of the central lessons learned during the last seven years of implementation of NRLM has been 

that while investments in building institutional platforms of rural poor households is a critical 
foundation for sustainable poverty reduction, it is not sufficient unless these institutions are 
engaged in higher level production systems and have better market interface. Integration of core 
social mobilization and leveraging of financial resources have been adequately demonstrated. The 
next level challenge is to leverage social capital into economic opportunities and crowd in private 
investments; and engage with more commercial partnerships to integrate rural households into 
higher-level income opportunities. Therefore, one of the main thrusts of the NRETP (NRLP- AF) will 
be to develop value chains using end-to-end investments in selected commodities and facilitating 
access to finance to support enterprises in agriculture and allied sectors, thus contributing to 
productivity and profitability. The proposed project will build on existing investments and 
institutional capital to bring further income increase and inclusive growth in rural areas.   

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Original PDO  
 

1. To establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial 
andselected public services. 

 
Current PDO  
 

2. To establish efficient and effective institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase 
household income through sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial 
andselected public services. 

 
Key Results:  

3. The PDO indicators for the additional financing are:  

• 60% of SHGs# federated into Village Organizations.  

• 40% of SHG members* report reduction in high cost debt 

• 50% of SHG members report 30% increase in asset. 

• 20 % increase in income of households that have accessed technical and financial services1 
 
D. Project Description  
        
Project Beneficiary:  

1. The proposed NRETP (NRLP AF) intends to support 100 districts from the existing 13 NRLP States 
towards high end technical assistance and investment support towards deepening and scaling up of 
the economic transformative initiatives that were introduced as part of dedicated funds under NRLP. 

 
1 Define technical and financial services that will be provided/considered  



Additionally, it would support to the Mission Antyodaya program that intends to further accelerate 
economic transformation in selected areas, building on the NRLP outcomes.  

 
2. While MoRD through their own increased budget allocation would continue to saturate and bring 

remaining rural poor into the fold of women SHGs,  the specific investments under additional financing  
will work with targeted households that are already part of SHGs and would focus on strengthening 
of existing network (higher level federations i.e. VO and above) of community organizations of women 
having potential to be mobilized into producer groups and producer organizations and transit to next 
generation economic initiatives like high value agriculture including market access, enterprise and 
skills development etc. MoRD will directly reach out to over a million households through these 
initiatives. The project will support around 50000 individual enterprises; and around 100,000 youth 
will be trained and placed with in formal job markets using the resources available under DDUJKY and 
other skilling & entrepreneurship program of the Government of India. 

Project Component 

3. Component 1: Institutional and Human Capacity Development 
This component will continue to finance technical assistance consultancies, human resources, 
training and development of training material/approaches. Financing under this component will 
endeavor to place skilled professionals to work with NRLM at the national, state and district levels. 
As mentioned in the section on rationale, the TA will be focused on helping the National and State 
teams transition to a new phase of the NRLM that involves greater focus on economic initiatives such 
as high value agriculture and value chain development, enterprise and skills development. Given that 
experiences from these initiatives are relatively nascent, the additional financing support will 
emphasize sourcing of technical support from agencies (Public, Private and NGOs) with the requisite 
technical expertise in rural enterprise development.  National, regional and international experiences 
and skills may be sourced for this objective.   

 
4. In addition, a new sub component focused on providing technical assistance for Mission Antyodaya 

will be introduced. Specifically, as part of this sub component:  
 

a. TA will be provided for Mission Antyodaya at the national, state and district level.    
b. Support under this sub-component will be for 13 NRLP states and nearly 100 districts in those 13 

states. The 100 districts with the highest intensity of the NRLM implementation will be selected 
for the project. These districts will be the districts with the highest amount of mobilization and 
capitalization (both the catalytic capital from NRLM and the finance from commercial banks) and 
the possibilities of having transformative economic potential. Additionally, and as far as possible, 
the project will strive for coordinated technical or investment support with the blocks and 
panchayats selected under Mission Antyodaya and those under NRLP.   
  

5. Component 2. State Livelihood Support  
The activities to be financed under this Component will remain essentially the same but with further 
refinements to focus on the next generation institutional and investment support as described above 
in the rationale. Sub component 2.1 (State Rural Livelihoods Support) will remain the same but 
district level support will be focused on 100 districts that will be selected for project coverage under 
this NRETP (NRLP AF). Under sub component 2.2 (Institution Building and Capacity Building) financing 
will be oriented towards the mobilization of the producer groups and producer organizations. Under 
sub component 2.3 (Community Investment Support) the focus would be on financing community 



organizations mainly towards enterprise and skill development initiatives. The quantum of financing 
under sub component 2.4 (Special Programs) will be significantly scaled up and most of this financing 
will be focused on scaling up initiatives like high value agriculture including market access, enterprise 
and skills development etc.  that were introduced under the dedicated funds under this sub-
component during the project restructuring undertaken in January 2016. 

 
6. Component 3. Innovation and Partnership Support: There is no change in the activities to be financed 

under this component. The component will continue to finance pilot initiatives and technical 
assistance consultancies that support innovative livelihoods activities in agriculture, livestock, youth 
employment, among others, for rural poor households.  Learning and documentation of experiences 
from these initiatives will be emphasized. 

 
7. Component 4. Project Implementation Support: There is no change in the activities to be financed under this 

component. This component will continue to strengthen the National Mission Management Unit for effective 
project management at the national level, finance the Monitoring and Evaluation activities and ICT initiatives.  
Learning and documentation of experiences under the economic transformative investments and institutional 
strengthening programs will be emphasized. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
1. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements:  The MoRD through National Rural Livelihoods Promotion 

Society (NRLPS)/National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) will be responsible for overall technical 
assistance, guideline formulations, National level partnerships, coordination, monitoring, supervision and 
release of funds to thirteen participating States. At the State level, the project will be implemented by the 
State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLMs) set up under NRLM as per the agreed framework detailed out in 
Project Implementation Plan (PIP). Each participating States will carry out a diagnostic study of pro-poor 
agriculture value chain and potential of cluster based enterprise development based on which they will 
prepare their Annual Action Plan (AAP) or multi-year State Perspective and Implementation Plan (SPIP). 

 
 
 
 . 

   
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The additional finance would cover about 100 districts in the current 13 states. The states are spread across 
different agro climatic zones with varied natural and geographical features ranging from wet and humid to 
dry and deciduous as well as include some coastal areas. All the states have previous experience in 
implementing NRETP (NRLP AF) supported livelihood activities in varied agro climatic zones. There is also 
prior experience of working in different geographies and with environmental and social setting of the rural 
areas, which are primarily agrarian. The expected locations influenced by additional financing are likely to 
be similar to those covered under the ongoing NRETP (NRLP AF), and therefore, poses no significant risks of 
potential cumulative and localized significant adverse environmental impacts. Livelihood activities would 
continue to centre around the sustainable use of natural resources, where these are available at project 
locations. NRETP (NRLP AF) NRETP (NRLP AF) The additional financing will be spread across 100 Districts in 
13 high poverty states. The states and project areas were identified based on their high incidence of rural 
poverty and socioeconomic backwardness as well as higher concentration of marginalized population 
groups such as scheduled tribes (indigenous peoples) and scheduled castes. States like Bihar and UP have 
substantial population of Scheduled Castes (SC) and Other Backward Castes (OBC) who are more vulnerable 
and marginalized compared to general population. On the other hand, states like Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, 
Odisha and parts of Rajasthan, MP, and Maharashtra are dominated by tribals. Within these geographies, 
the NRETP (NRLP AF) will prioritize districts/blocks with higher levels of social mobilsation and financial 
capitalization, which will overlap with pockets of higher tribal and marginalized populations.  

 

 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes  

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes  

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No  



Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes  

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No  

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No  

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No  

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project proposes to scale-up the existing livelihoods promoted through dedicated special funds. The livelihoods 
include varies use of natural resources and linked processes, such as, Agriculture, Dairy, Small ruminants, Fisheries, 
Non-Timber Forest Produce (lac culture, hill broom, tamarind etc.). The project will also support Non-farm enterprises 
including small processing units and value addition. The project has been consciously promoting special initiatives for 
environmental sustainability of livelihoods such as community managed sustainable agriculture, fodder cultivation and 
stall feeding of milch animals and goats etc. However as the project proposes to scale-up the same interventions 
through additional financing, improper management of any of these livelihood activities and unawareness among the 
SHG members may result in negative impacts, such as: (i) indiscriminate use of chemical inputs in agriculture leading 
to contamination of soil, water and surroundings; (ii) degradation of common grazing lands due to increased pressure 
of grazing and improper pasture management practices; (iii) decreased regeneration capacity of NTFP species in forest 
areas; and (iv) over use of water resources, particularly ground water etc. Most of these activities are small-scale 
interventions, spread over wide areas in several villages. Further, any potential adverse environmental impact and risk 
from these activities can be mitigated, contained and even reversed. Therefore, no potential large scale, significant 
and/or irreversible impacts are envisaged. In addition to Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), the safeguard policies 
on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36) and Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) have been triggered 
recognizing the importance of integrating sustainable management practices in forest-dependent and agriculture-
based livelihoods. The safeguard policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) has not been triggered as the project funds are 
unlikely to be used for community-level civil works such as small dams, embankments, etc. (Project funds would not 
support activities involving excavations, etc., that may impact physical cultural resources. Therefore, OP/BP 4.11 is not 
triggered. The key social safeguard issues and impacts associated with the NRETP (NRLP AF) are: ensuring project 
interventions and implementation processes are aligned with the socio-cultural context in tribal areas and respond to 
their development priorities; inclusion of traditionally marginalized social groups such as scheduled castes, migrant 
labor, and other households identified under socioeconomic census survey (SECC); promoting strategies that reduce 
gender gaps and advance women’s economic empowerment; and mitigation of any localized, adverse impacts from 
small scale infrastructure that would be coming up in project areas. No adverse long terms impact on tribals and 
indigenous population are expected from this project. OP 4.10 is triggered as states and districts having substantial 
tribal population are included in Project areas. OP. 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered as involuntary land 
acquisition is not envisaged. Small scale community level, infrastructure such as citizen service centres, training 
centres and custom hiring centres are expected to come up largely in pre-existing facilities. However, some of these 
may require small land parcels that are expected to be leased or donated by Panchayats or local government 


departments or individual donors with proper MoUs and due diligence. Given the size of small scale infrastructure, a 
large portion of which is expected to be rented/leased with no or minimal construction, the risks of labor influx are 
not going to be significant. Project interventions are not expected to cause any adverse livelihood impacts and 
restriction of access to land and resources as a result to land taking by the project.  
  
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Describe any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: No 
severe or long-term impacts are expected due to proposed livelihood activities, mainly implemented through the 
women Self Help Groups. Agriculture, livestock, fisheries, non-timber forest produce and non-farm sectors are the 
predominant sectors in which rural poor households are involved and individual and household level investments in 
these sectors generally do not result in potential indirect and/or long-term impacts in the project areas. Further, as 
the experience of existing Bank projects has shown, the nature of activities/works taken up by the SHGs and 
federations under the ongoing project is likely to remain so during the additional financing. No adverse long term 
social impacts are envisaged from the AF interventions and investments. The potential long-term positive impacts are 
expected to be: social, economic and financial empowerment of the poorest households, especially of Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and women. The poorest and most excluded households would have greater access to, 
security and sustainability of livelihood resources, and enhanced household incomes. The project villages would most 
likely see greater cohesion amongst the poorest social groups, greater capacity and assertiveness among the poor in 
claiming their rights and entitlements, and better participation in local government structures and processes. Gender 
relations could improve as collective action gives women self-esteem and confidence to voice their needs and 
priorities in both the public and private spheres. Overall, the social dynamics and rural institutional environment are 
expected to be much more supportive of the livelihood needs of the poorest households.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Since this is an additional financing aiming to scale up successful interventions, no analysis of alternatives was 
undertaken. However, based on implementation experience during the ongoing project, the safeguards strategy will 
continue to mainstream the environmental best practices into the Package of Practices (PoP) of the livelihood 
activities (e.g.: stall feeding in goatary, non-chemical pest control measures in agriculture). In addition, Promotion of 
alternate green solutions like use of renewable energy, Community Managed Sustainable Agriculture are planned 
during the additional financing. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The measures taken during the ongoing project for addressing safeguard policies issues will continue throughout the 
implementation of the additional financing. EMF compliance with the mandatory regulatory requirements list would 
apply to all the clusters in the project and appropriate capacity building support for compliance with regulations and 
awareness building on better environmental practices in livelihood activities would be provided. Efforts will be made 
to develop and apply a sustainability index for funding potential activities through the dedicated fund. The index will 
be based on the principles of resource efficiency, minimal adverse impacts and post-investment support continuation 
of the livelihood. An assessment of the EMF in select states was undertaken during the ongoing project .There is mixed 
experience in terms of borrower’s capacity to plan and implement the measures required for addressing safeguards 
issues. Most of the states (Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan) have had previous experience 
in implementing livelihood projects and other states have also implemented EMF and SMF under NRETP (NRLP AF). 
States that have implemented World Bank-supported livelihood projects as well as NRETP (NRLP AF) have a higher 



 

level of readiness and competency to implement the EMF. Some of these states (e.g. Bihar) have implemented the 
green solutions at a considerable scale. The above findings from these assessments are being incorporated into the 
updated EMF To streamline these capacities, it has been agreed with the Ministry of Rural Development that the 
National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) will have the Livelihood Specialists as the anchor person for EMF to 
support and monitor the implementation in the participating states. Further, the State Mission Management Unit 
(SMMU) of the State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLM) would have Environmental Focal Points at the state level 
(Livelihood Managers), district levels and among the block level project facilitating teams to streamline the EMF 
requirements at all levels. The Technical Partners on different value chains will be taken on board for integration of 
the best practices and regulatory requirements into the Package of Practices and Capacity Building programs. The 
NRETP (NRLP AF) social management framework (SMF), including OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (Scheduled Tribes), 
will continue to apply to the AF. The SMF comprises strategies for targeting and inclusion of scheduled castes and 
schedule tribe groups/areas, consultation and participation, gender & women’s economic empowerment, citizen’s 
engagement, grievance redress and safeguard screening/mitigation planning for community projects involving 
land/infrastructure. The SMF addresses the issues and needs of tribal people and incorporates the key requirements 
of O.P. 4.10 especially with respect to free, prior and informed consultations and broad community support. The SMF 
includes specific provisions for informed consultations, participation and inclusion of the SC/ST and other excluded 
households, with a special focus on tribal people. The SMF also provides for institutional arrangements and capacity 
building activities of project staff, community institutions and partner agencies. Community projects involving 
productive infrastructure and land donation would follow consultative, transparent and voluntary procedures. MORD 
and the 13 SRLMs have implemented the SMF and its constituent strategies with varying levels of intensity and quality 
in the ongoing NRLP satisfactorily. Under the NRETP (NRLP AF), the capacities and performance of the social 
development staff and partners would be strengthened through a range of measures. NRETP (NRLP AF) aims to 
intensify interventions, financing & technical support for high value agriculture, rural value chains, skills and 
enterprises, producer organizations, innovative livelihood approaches, digital financial inclusion as well as productive 
infrastructure for post-production processes and value addition. Technical Assistance will also be provided to 
convergence (Mission Antoyodaya). Partnerships with technical resource agencies from private and non-profit and 
public sector will be strengthened. Increased investments in high value agriculture, enterprises, productive 
infrastructure and financing of producer organizations would need more explicit criteria for inclusive beneficiary 
targeting and benefit sharing as well as social safeguard screening to minimize elite capture and social exclusion. 
Dedicated HR and Capacity building program on socially inclusive and gendered value chains/enterprises, social 
safeguard screening and risk mitigation and social sustainability will be supported to ensure satisfactory social 
performance of project counterparts. To respond to these focus areas in the AF, MORD has updated the existing SMF 
especially with respect to social inclusion protocols, social safeguard screening mechanisms and inclusive beneficiary 
targeting and benefit sharing criteria for financing of producer organizations and productive infrastructure. Additional 
measures on staffing, capacity building, technical assistance, knowledge programs as well as citizen engagement and 
grievance redressal would be implemented. The results framework will continue to track and report on gender, 
inclusion, citizen’s engagement and women’s economic empowerment. NRETP (NRLP AF) will significantly advance the 
gender mainstreaming and women’s economic empowerment agenda through strategies/specific interventions on 
women led producer organizations and enterprises, Start-up Village Entrepreneurship Program (SVEP) and upgrading 
of skills in selected self-employment occupations for women SHG members and youth. Interventions on digital 
payments, financial inclusion/literacy, Business Correspondents (BC) and enterprise financing will lead to significant 
financial empowerment of rural women. Support to Mission Antoyodaya will strengthen women’s advocacy and 
agency in delivery of social safety net and entitlement services for the rural poor. Nutrition sensitive agriculture and 
interventions on food handling and hygiene will benefit the women disproportionately. The results framework will 
continue to track and report on gender, inclusion, citizen’s engagement and women’s economic empowerment. Client 
has also been organizing regular reviews and lesson learning events on the gender, social inclusion and vulnerability 



reduction dimensions of the SMF. A discrete stocktaking review was undertaken at Midterm stage of the project. 
Overall the project has been performing satisfactorily on mobilsation, inclusion and financial and economic 
empowerment of women and marginalization communities particularly tribals and SC households. SMF 
implementation and reporting would need to improve further on safeguards, GRM and benefit sharing dimensions of 
productive infrastructure and economic clusters. As described above, these are the aspects that are being updated in 
the SMF  
 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the proposed project include the SHG members, groups and federations of rural poor in the 
project districts, technical partners, relevant government departments etc. The existing safeguards arrangements will 
continue to apply. If required, the existing EMF document will be updated based on a short field assessment and 
would be disclosed in English and the local language (Hindi) on the websites of the NMMU, State Departments of Rural 
Development and on the Bank’s InfoShop. The most important stakeholders of the project are the rural poor and their 
organizations, including SHGs, federations, producer organizations and government and non-governmental 
organizations working on rural poverty reduction and livelihoods advancement. The MoRD has held stakeholder 
consultations to inform the design and implementation of the project and address the limitations of existing rural 
development programs that target the poorest and most excluded groups. The following field consultations were also 
held.  
 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


1 

 

 

PROGRAM-FOR-RESULTS INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 

APPRAISAL STAGE 

Report No.:PIDA0128822  

 

Program Name Strengthening Markets For Agriculture And Rural 

Transformation In Punjab (Smart Punjab) 

Region SAR 

Country Pakistan 

Sector Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Program for Results 

Program ID P162446 

Parent Program ID  

Borrower(s) Economic Affairs Division, Government of Pakistan 

Implementing Agency Planning & Development Department, Government of Punjab 

Date PID Prepared October 1, 2017 

Estimated Date of Appraisal 

Completion 

October 23, 2017 

Estimated Date of Board 

Approval 

December 19, 2017 

 

 Country Context 

1. Pakistan has achieved continued GDP growth and substantially reduced poverty. 
GDP growth was 5.3% in FY16/17, largely owing to gains in the agricultural and services 

sectors. The national poverty headcount declined from 64.3% in FY02 to 29.5% in FY14.  

 

2. Amid these gains, evidence is emerging that Punjab—a major driver of the national 
economy and an agricultural stronghold—is experiencing rising inequality. Punjab accounts 

for more than half of Pakistan’s GDP, and the majority (63%) of Punjab’s population of 110 

million is rural. Although poverty declined even more within Punjab than nationwide over 2002–

14 (from 61% to 25%), Punjab is the most unequal province in Pakistan, with a Gini coefficient 

of 29.7 in FY14. Four out of five of Punjab’s poor live in rural areas, where 8.7 million 

households earn an average of PKR 28,517 per month through farming alone (35%), a mix of 

farm and non-farm employment (31%), and non-farm employment (34%). The average rural 

household has 6.49 individuals but merely 1.66 income earners. Farm size continues to decline. 

Two-thirds of farms were smaller than 2 hectares in 2010 (versus less than half in 1990). 

 Sectoral and Institutional Context 

3. Agriculture is a key contributor to the economy in Pakistan in general and Punjab 
in particular, yet agricultural growth is languishing. Nationally, agriculture—crops, 

livestock, fisheries, forestry—accounts for 21% of GDP, employs 44% of the labor force, and 

directly and indirectly delivers nearly 80% of the total value of Pakistan’s exports (worth about 

US$ 12 billion). Growth is evaporating in the sector; it was 3.3% over the last decade but nearly 

zero in FY16 (0.3%). Crop and livestock productivity are lower than in other Asian countries. 

Except for maize, crop yields have barely risen in decades. In Punjab, where agriculture 


contributes 26% of GDP and provides 40% of employment, growth in agriculture has been 

highly erratic as well as low, although the livestock subsector has exhibited encouraging signs. 

Punjab encompasses 72.6% of national cropped area and 77.7% of national irrigated area. 

Approximately 62% of Punjab’s area (20.63 million hectares) is cultivated, and about 60% of 

cultivated area lies within the Indus Basin Water System. The province provides large shares of 

the country’s primary crops: maize (78%), wheat (77%), cotton (73%), sugarcane (63%), and 

rice (52%). The factors limiting agricultural growth include poor adoption of modern 

technologies, poor service delivery, and poorly functioning agricultural markets.  

 

4. Above all, however, flagging agricultural and economic growth in Punjab can be 
traced to current agricultural and irrigation policies. Ample evidence confirms that 

subsidies, agricultural support prices, caps on meat and milk prices, low investment, and 

weakening institutions support investment in traditional crops at the expense of high-value 

agriculture (HVA), discourage efficient water use, and ultimately suppress agricultural growth.  

 

5. Subsidies dominate public spending on agriculture in Punjab. These subsidies—US$ 
1.25 billion in FY17 (Table 1)—are largely regressive, generate significant negative 

environmental externalities, and focus almost exclusively on major crops rather than HVA. The 

provincial government (GoPunjab) pays more than 40% (US$ 515 million) of these subsidies, 

which are about 2.5 times higher than the funding for agriculture in the provincial Annual 

Development Plan (ADP). Not all of this largesse reaches the producer; for example, a 

substantial share of fertilizer subsidies benefits fertilizer companies and the bulk of wheat 

subsidies goes to banks. Few subsidies target small-scale producers.  

Table 1: Subsidies to agriculture in Punjab (US$ m) 

Item Subsidies paid by 

the Federal 

Government in 

Punjab 

Subsidies paid by 

the Government of 

Punjab 

Total 

subsidies 

Fertilizer gas subsidy 300
a
 0 300 

Reducing General Sales Tax (GST) on diammonium phosphate 

from PKR 400 to PKR 100/bag 

92
b
 0 92 

Reducing GST on urea from PKR 400 to PKR 75/bag 78
c
 0 78 

Reduction in electricity tariff for tubewells from PKR 8.85 to 

PKR 5.35/kWh  

219
d
 41 260 

Subsidy on imported fertilizer 34
e
 0 34 

E-voucher–based subsidy for potash fertilizer  19 19 

Wheat procurement scheme  333 333 

Wheat export subsidies 10
f
 0 10 

Interest-free loans to farmers  57 57 

Irrigation maintenance and repair (M&R)  60 60 

Cotton and wheat seed  3 3 

Crop insurance through Crop Loan Insurance Scheme (CLIS)  2 2 

TOTAL 733 515 1,248 
Source: Federal and Provincial Budget Speech 2017–18, and Agriculture Department.

 

a Total gas subsidy to fertilizer manufacturers is US$ 425 million, while Punjab accounts for approximately 70% of total fertilizer use in 

Pakistan. b Total subsidy is US$ 131.5 million, of which 70% is in Punjab. c Total subsidy is US$ 112 million, of which 70% is in Punjab. d 

Total subsidy on electricity for tubewells is US$ 257 million, and 85% of tubewells are located in Punjab. e Total subsidy for imported fertilizer 
is budgeted at US$ 48 million, of which 70% can be assigned to Punjab. f Total subsidy is US$ 14.3 million, of which 70% is Punjab. 

 

6. The costs of current policies and subsidies extend beyond their fiscal cost. Because 
most subsidies are embodied in inputs or input prices, they promote excessive or imbalanced use 



3 

 

of inputs such as water and fertilizer, resulting in negative externalities and sustainability issues 

(for instance, salinity, sodicity, and waterlogging from water pumping or overuse have degraded 

about 25% of formerly fertile land in Punjab). Wheat subsidies are embodied in the wheat price, 

which is governed by a procurement price set far above import parity, to the detriment of net 

wheat buyers (Box 1). Current policies and subsidies encourage farmers to produce more of the 

same surplus commodities rather than to provide a more diverse range of other products 

demanded by the market. Ninety percent of the cropped area in Punjab remains under major 

crops (dominated by wheat), while only nine percent is planted to higher-value crops. Significant 

benefits are sacrificed by this misallocation of resources: export earnings; the jobs that would 

otherwise be created downstream through value chains; the value added by agro-processing 

beyond milling alone; the higher incomes for producers; the production of nutrient-dense crops 

that reduce malnutrition; and the efficiencies in water use that promote diversification, 

sustainable use of scarce water (Box 2), and resilience to climate shocks and climate change. 

 

Box 1: The high costs of wheat procurement in Punjab  

Since the late 1950s, the government has purchased up to 25% of the wheat crop and up to 50% of the marketed 

wheat surplus. The costs of this procurement system are passed on to urban consumers and to the rural poor who 

are net buyers of wheat. Patronage and rent-seeking are endemic, particularly in the distribution of gunny bags, 

delivery of wheat to purchase points, and releases to flour mills). The system has other enormous costs. The 

direct costs of buying, storing, and releasing wheat at a fixed price over the year are estimated at US$ 333 million 

per year, of which more than 90% consists of interest payments on current borrowing and accumulated debt. As 

of July 2017, the wheat debt of GoPunjab to the State Bank of Pakistan stood at US$ 3.36 billion, against a 

collateral wheat stock worth half of that amount at best. Efforts to dispose of excess wheat stocks in export 

markets have been largely unsuccessful, despite generous export subsidies. Indirect costs include physical losses 

owing to poor storage, high spoilage, and pilferage; over-production of wheat and the consequent under-

production of higher-value commodities; diversion of credit from the banking system; and a lack of incentives for 

private actors to build storage facilities that could also serve other crops. The high procurement price has caused 

wheat production to surpass domestic needs, even as annual average per capita consumption of wheat continues 

to decline. 

 

Box 2: Irrigation price policy and inefficient water use in Punjab 

Irrigation has delivered notable agricultural productivity gains to Punjab in the past, but the irrigation sector 

suffers from major financial deficits. Water charges (abiana) fail to reflect actual water use or cover maintenance 

and repair (M&R) costs. Abiana rates typically represent less than 0.2% of crop budgets. The flat water rate per 

acre implemented in 2003/04 gives farmers little reason to conserve water and use it more efficiently. At best, 

current M&R spending (about US$ 65 million per year) is one-third of the minimum amount required. 

 

7. Now that Pakistan has achieved self-sufficiency in wheat, it seeks to spur further 
agricultural growth and transformation, a process in which Punjab will have a major role. 

The goal of becoming self-sufficient in food grain (especially wheat) production has long 

underpinned policies, investment priorities, and public expenditures in agriculture, but now 

Pakistan must evaluate options for future growth in light of: (1) the rapid shift in domestic 

demand away from food grains to high-value agricultural products; (2) the significant yet largely 

unexploited comparative advantage for several of those products, which can provide 

opportunities to generate export revenue and jobs; (3) the exhaustion of options for new sources 

of irrigation water (productivity improvements depend on obtaining “more crop per drop”); and 

(4) the need for production systems to become more resilient as climate change progresses. 



4 

 

 

8. Agriculture requires a paradigm shift in Punjab to unlock opportunities for future 
growth. Punjab should restore its agricultural competitiveness through innovations that renew 

growth in on-farm productivity and improve efficiency and quality throughout the post-harvest 

value chain. At 0.18% of agricultural GDP, Pakistan’s public expenditures on agricultural 

research are the lowest in a region that is already lagging others. Most agricultural research 

expenditures still go to food grains and other “major” crops (rice, maize, sugarcane, cotton) 

rather than to high-value crops and livestock products. Few resources are dedicated to post-

harvest management, including value addition, quality, food safety, and nutrition. A high 

potential pay-off is associated with redirecting public expenditures and associated policies 

toward the best potential investments for outcomes, with a focus on reforms in wheat, irrigation, 

fertilizers, and marketing, and concomitant investments to improve service delivery, agricultural 

R&D, and insurance. 

 

9. The rural non-farm sector is a neglected source of overall economic growth for 
Punjab. Half of Punjab’s 14.6 million households are classified as agricultural (5.3 million farm 

households and 2 million livestock households). These farm households on average earn almost 

half of their income from non-farm activities, including agriculture value adding and 

agribusiness. But poor access to and high cost of finance, inefficient markets, limited skills, 

insufficient power (electricity), and a weak enabling environment hinder growth in the rural non-

farm sector, including agribusiness. Most rural non-farm employment (77%) remains informal. 

 

10. Lack of funds limits the size of most rural enterprises and 30-40% of them make 
very small fixed investments. Lack of credit at reasonable interest rates and appropriate 

maturities, is also a key constraint for most rural enterprises including agribusinesses. Major 

barriers to institutional credit include lack of collateral, poor financial records and an inability to 

prepare business plans. 

 

11. In assessing sources of economic and agricultural growth, the issues of gender and 
climate change cannot be overlooked. Agriculture in Pakistan suffers from serious gender 

inequality and discrimination. According to the Global Gender Gap Report 2016, Pakistan ranks 

143
rd

 out of 144 countries for women’s economic participation (labor force participation is 22% 

for women, compared to 68% for men). Agriculture is the main source of income for 75% of 

economically active women in Pakistan, yet women are less likely than men to own income-

generating assets (land, equipment), obtain credit, and exercise power in financial or economic 

decisions. Poor access to new farming technologies and techniques, the lack of female extension 

workers, and high illiteracy among rural women further discourage success in agriculture.  

 

12. Punjab agriculture is increasingly feminizing. The share of female employment in 
agriculture has grown steadily as male employment has shifted to more productive sectors. In 

2014, women accounted for 47% of agricultural employment. Anecdotal evidence suggests that 

women work mostly on small farms and engage predominantly in horticultural and livestock 

production. It is vital to recognize how much of this agricultural work is unpaid (67% in 2014 

based on Labor Force Survey data). The Punjab Livestock & Dairy Development Department 

recognizes women’s primary role in livestock production and has invested in improving the 

capacity of female producers (including training and hiring 45,000 young extension assistants 

http://reports.weforum.org/global-gender-gap-report-2016/economies/#economy=PAK


5 

 

who will work on a part time basis, half of them women), but often women’s significant 

contributions to agriculture are poorly reflected in plans and programs. 

 

13. Pakistan’s climate change risk is magnified by growing water scarcity, uncontrolled 
urbanization, and rapid population growth. The Global Climate Risk Index places Pakistan 

among the top 10 most climate-vulnerable countries. Pakistan increasingly experiences droughts 

and cyclones; since 2010 floods have caused damages approaching US$ 14 billion. Climate 

change heightens the pressure to manage water resources with utmost care. The melting Hindu 

Kush–Karakoram–Himalayan glaciers could affect water flows into the Indus River system, with 

implications for energy and food security. Agriculture produces approximately 41% of all GHG 

emissions in Pakistan, mostly through livestock production, and Pakistan has a growing 

population with an increasingly animal-based diet. To continue to reduce poverty and increase 

shared prosperity, Pakistan requires technologies and practices for climate-smart agriculture 

(CSA), which will sustainably improve productivity in agricultural systems (particularly 

livestock systems), enhance resilience, and reduce GHG emissions. 

 

14. The proposed SMART Punjab Program aligns with the World Bank objectives of 
private sector development and inclusion in the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) 

(FY2015–19) and the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared 

prosperity. The CPS recognizes that proper water resource management is the next key 

development challenge in Pakistan, particularly Punjab. The SMART Punjab Program 

specifically supports CPS Outcomes 2.2 (Increased Productivity in Farms), 3.1 (Increased 

Financial Inclusion for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and Women), 3.2 (Reduced 

Vulnerability for Groups at Risk), 4.1 (Improved Public Resources Management), and 4.4 

(Adoption of Performance and Transparency Mechanisms in Selected Institutions). The Pakistan 

Performance and Learning Review 2015–20 approved by the Board on June 15, 2017 also 

recognizes the need for additional attention to agricultural productivity and creating markets for 

high value commodities. 

 

15. A Program for Results (PforR) is the most suitable instrument for the SMART 
Punjab Program. A coherent package of policy change, institutional strengthening, and 

reorientation of public investments in agriculture is required to attain fundamental improvements 

in the policy regime, stronger institutions in the agricultural sector, and improved post-harvest 

value addition through increased private investment in agribusiness. The PforR instrument 

appears uniquely suited for delivering this kind of package through a clearly articulated results 

chain, while further building the GoPunjab’s capacity and deepen and develop its own systems. 

The US$300 m provided by the PforR will be co-financing a much larger government program 

of US$1.6 billion This PforR mobilizes experience from World Bank Global Practices and 

solution areas (Agriculture, Trade & Competitiveness, Water, Social Development, Environment 

& Natural Resources, disaster risk management/climate change) and the International Finance 

Corporation. Although the PforR is a comparatively new instrument, GoPunjab is familiar with it 

under the Bank-supported Jobs & Competitiveness PforR (P155963). 

 Program Scope 
 

16. The GoPunjab program for agriculture and rural transformation (the “broader 
Government program”) emphasizes enabling productivity, increasing competitiveness in 



6 

 

agricultural marketing and trade, and enhancing resilience as reflected in planning 

documents
1
 and the Medium-Term Development Framework (MTDF). The broader Government 

program is supported by a capital investment for agriculture, livestock, farm to market roads, and 

irrigation of US$3.797 billion over five years (FY18–22), including US$1.145 billion to 

agriculture and livestock. In addition, there is a recurrent budget allocation of US$0.330 billion 

for irrigation M&R and US$0.115 billion for human resources, bringing the size of the 

expenditure framework of the broader Government program to US$4.242 billion. Recall that the 

GoPunjab also spends an estimated US$515 million each year on agricultural subsidies including 

wheat (US$333 million) as part of its recurrent expenditures. 

 

17. The SMART Punjab PforR will support selected parts of the broader Government 
program over a five-year period (Table 2). These selected parts will be referred to as the 

“PforR-supported Program” and consist of 14 out of the Government’s 25 focus areas with a 

focus on increasing crop and livestock productivity, research and extension policy, transition 

towards HVA and CSA, improving the functioning of crop as well as livestock markets 

including food safety, livestock breed and preventive care, agribusiness, and enhancing resilience 

and inclusiveness. 

 

18. There are several GoPunjab investments that are part of the broader Government 
program but not part of the PforR-supported Program. These include the Extension 2.0 

program; agricultural finance, mechanization and education; livestock census, feed, marketing, 

and women programs; government farms and experiment stations; the on-going rural roads 

program; development and rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure; and on-farm water 

management (including high-efficiency irrigation systems) which is already funded by the Bank 

through the Punjab Irrigated-agriculture Productivity Improvement Project (PIPIP – P125999). 

 

19. The SMART Punjab PforR will help the government promote transformational 
change in the crop and livestock subsectors by focusing on activities contributing to three 

Results Areas: (1) increased on-farm productivity and value of agriculture and livestock; (2) 

increased value addition and competitiveness of agriculture and livestock; and (3) enhanced 

resilience of smallholder farmers to climate change and natural disasters. Each Results Area 

involves a specific combination of policy reforms, institutional strengthening, and public 

investments. 

 

 

        
Table 2: Government of Punjab agriculture program and scope of proposed SMART Punjab Program for Results (PforR) 

Government program Scope of PforR  Activities Responsible department(s) 

Results Area 1: Increased on-farm productivity and value of agriculture and livestock 

(1) Providing farmers with access to 
quality inputs including seed and E-

vouchers for fertilizer 

(1) Targeted subsidy on fertilizer for small 
farmers through E-vouchers 

 

 Develop E-voucher–based subsidy scheme for fertilizer 
and gradually extend the scheme from 21,000 farmers in 

August 2017 to 200,000 smallholders with less than 5 ha 

by 2021 

Agriculture Department  

(2) Improving agriculture and livestock 
research and extension services 

 

(2) – Re-orientation of crop and livestock 
research and extension 

– Increased financial support for crop 
and livestock research 

 Review existing agriculture and livestock research and 
extension systems 

 Approval of new research and extension policy and 
strategy by the Provincial Cabinet 

 Gradual increase of allocation for agriculture and livestock 
research from 0.1% of AgGDP in FY17 to 0.4% in FY22 

through Annual Development Plan (ADP) and recurrent 

budget 

– Agriculture Department  
– Livestock & Dairy 

Development Department 

– Planning & Development 
(P&D) Department 

(3) ICT-based Extension system 2.0 in 
Agriculture, and 9211 Virtual 

Governance System in Livestock 

   

(4) Introduction and promotion of Hi-
Tech Farm Mechanization 

Technologies 

   

(5) Agriculture land improvement and on-
farm water management through high-

efficiency irrigation systems (HEIS) 

   

(6) Strengthening agriculture and 
livestock education 

   

(7) Promoting micro-finance linkages and 
interest-free loans for small farmers 

   

(8) Improving livestock health (8) Paradigm shift in public support to 
animal health from curative to 

preventive healthcare, disease 

surveillance and regular vaccination 

 Establishing separate head of account in the provincial 
budget for curative and preventive health allocations 

 Gradually increasing the ratio of expenditures on curative 
and preventive animal health from 35:65 in FY17 to 10:90 

in FY22 

Livestock & Dairy Development 

Department 

(9) Enhancing productivity and improving 
livestock breeding through targeted 

progeny testing framework 

(9) Improving livestock breeding of 

specific species 
 Increasing stocks of specific animal breeds, including 

Sahiwal cow, Cholistani cow, and Neeli Ravi buffalo 

 Registration and development of verification database 

Livestock & Dairy Development 

Department 

(10) – Rationalizing wheat procurement 
and reducing strategic wheat 

reserves 

– Moving storage of public wheat 

reserves from bags to bulk through 

(10) – Phasing out government wheat 

procurement and reducing strategic 

wheat reserves to 1.0 million metric 

tons (MT) by 2021 

– Construction of steel silos for 1.0 

 GoPunjab to develop and approve plan for withdrawal 
from wheat market and reduce strategic wheat reserves to 

1.0 million MT in 2018 

 Gradual reduction of public wheat stocks to 1.0 million 
MT by 2021  

Food Department 



8 

 

Government program Scope of PforR  Activities Responsible department(s) 

construction of modern bulk storage 

facilities 

million MT  Development of modern silos for bulk storage of 1.0 
million MT of wheat 

(11) Promoting high-value agriculture 
(HVA) 

(11) Transitioning to HVA  Ensure gradual increase in allocation for HVA in the ADP 
from 3.5% of total capital budget for Agriculture (ADP) in 

FY17 to 15% in FY22 

– Agriculture Department 
– P&D Department 

Results Area 2: Increased value addition and competitiveness of agriculture and livestock 

(12) – Developing agricultural and 
livestock value chains 

– Promoting value addition through 

Agribusiness and Innovation Fund 

(12) Providing incentives to agribusiness 

for investments in value addition 

through matching grant scheme, 

training, and capacity building 

 Establishing the Agribusiness and Innovation Fund 

 Notifying the governance structure of the Fund 

 Notifying the Operational Manual for the Fund, including 
the modus operandi of the matching grant component 

 Approval of matching grants 

 Training and capacity building 

Agriculture Department 

(13) Deregulating and improving market 
conditions for livestock 

(13) Improving market conditions for 

livestock through removal of price 

caps on meat and raw milk 

 Excluding meat and milk from GoPunjab’s pricing list for 
Essential Commodities from 2018 onward 

Industries Department 

(14) Improving regulatory framework and 
institutions for agriculture produce 

marketing to enable private sector 

investment 

(14) Modernizing agriculture produce 

markets by regulatory transition from 

the Punjab Agricultural Produce 

Markets Ordinance, 1978 to the 

Punjab Agricultural Marketing 

Regulatory Authority (PAMRA) Act, 

2017 

 Stakeholder consultation on proposed PAMRA Act 

 Approval of PAMRA Act by GoPunjab Cabinet 

 Approval of PAMRA Act by GoPunjab Provincial 
Assembly 

 Enforcement of PAMRA Act 

 Full transition to PAMRA Act by 2021 

Agriculture Department 

(15) Revamping government livestock 
farms and experiment stations 

   

(16) Improving livestock feed systems    

(17) Revamping livestock markets and 
establishing eco marketing zones 

   

(18) Improving food safety (18) Establishment of food safety testing 
infrastructure 

 Establishing and staffing of one (1) provincial food, 
agriculture, and drug testing reference laboratory 

 Establishing and staffing of three (3) regional food testing 
labs 

 Establishing and staffing of nine (9) divisional mobile 
food testing labs 

Food Department 

(19) Poverty alleviation through provision 
of livestock and poultry to women 

   

Results Area 3: Enhanced resilience of smallholder farmers to climate change and natural disasters 

(20) Adapting to climate change for 
enhanced resilience of small farmers 

(20) – Increasing public investment in 

climate-smart agriculture (CSA) 

– Rolling out of agricultural insurance 

scheme 

 Gradual increase of allocation for CSA from 3% of total 
capital budget for agriculture in FY17 to 15% in FY22 

 Preparation of Diagnostic Report for agricultural 
insurance  

– Agriculture Department  
– P&D Department 



9 

 

Government program Scope of PforR  Activities Responsible department(s) 

 Preparation of work plan based on the recommendations 
of Diagnostic Report 

 Piloting of agricultural insurance in two districts in 
Punjab 

 Rolling out of agricultural insurance to all districts 

(21) Refurbishing small dams, barrages, 
rehabilitation and improvement of 

irrigation infrastructure, canal lining, 

improving flood works and irrigation 

drainage systems 

    

(22) Water conservation and institutional 
and regulatory reform 

(22) Improving financial sustainability of 

irrigation maintenance and repair 

(M&R) and governance 

 Modernizing the methods of assessing the area subject to 
water charges (abiana) and improving collection of the 

same 

 Approval and notification of Punjab Water Policy 

 Approval and notification of Punjab Groundwater Act 

 Improving water delivery performance ratio in seven (7) 
specific canals: Muzaffargarh, Abasia Link, Abasia, 

CRBC-III, Rangpur, Rangpur Lower and Upper Jhelum 

Irrigation Department  

(23) Widening and construction of 15,000 
km of rural roads 

   

(24) Enhanced implementation support for 
operationalizing sector plans 

(24) Capacity building and institutional 

strengthening 
 Preparation of annual work plans for training and 

capacity building including training for agribusiness and 

government departments 

 Approval of annual work plans by the government 

 Implementation of annual work plans 

Implementing departments 

(25) Establishing ICT-based M&E systems 
in government departments 

(25) Establishing ICT-based M&E systems 

in Agriculture and Food Departments 
 Establishing of ICT-based M&E systems – Agriculture Department 

– Food Department 
 

PforR geographic scope: Entire Punjab Province 

PforR implementation period: FY18–23 

Total investment plan: US$ 3.8 billion, out of which agriculture and livestock is US$ 1.145 billion, plus US$ 300 million PforR 



10 

 

 Program Development Objective 
 

20. The development objective for the SMART Punjab Program (referred to here as the 
“Program Development Objective” or PDO) is to increase the productivity of crop and livestock 

farmers, improve their climate resilience, and foster agribusiness development in Punjab. Box 3 

lists the PDO-level indicators by Results Area. 

Box 3: PDO-level indicators for the SMART Punjab Program, by Results Area 

Results Area 1—Increased on-farm productivity and value of agriculture and livestock 

PDO Indicator 1: Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services 

PDO Indicator 2: Annual increase in Punjab AgGDP 

Results Area 2—Increased value addition and competitiveness of agriculture and livestock 

PDO Indicator 3: Beneficiaries reached with financial services 

PDO Indicator 4: Number of private wholesale markets and collection centers established 

Results Area 3—Enhanced resilience of smallholder farmers to climate change and natural disasters 

PDO Indicator 5: Number of farmers covered by agricultural insurance 

PDO Indicator 6: Number of farmers adopting CSA packages 

PDO Indicator 7: Improvement in irrigation water service delivery 

 

21. To achieve the PDO, the SMART Punjab PforR supports the implementation of a 
coherent package of policy reforms, institutional change, and reorientation of public 

resources toward productive public investments and smart subsidies. Specific key reforms 

include a shift from universal to targeted subsidies through an E-voucher Scheme for 

smallholders (< 5 hectares), modernization of wheat marketing by phasing out public wheat 

procurement, reducing strategic wheat reserves from 4 million metric tons (MT) to 1 million MT, 

removing distortions in output markets for crops and livestock products, and reforming 

provincial crop and livestock research. SMART Punjab will also improve the financial 

sustainability and efficient use of irrigation systems, promote agribusiness, and improve the 

resilience of producers by designing and implementing an area yield index-based crop insurance 

system, which could potentially leverage access to production credit. 

 

22. Progress toward each of the three Results Areas that contribute to the PDO will be 
measured through 12 Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). Each DLI involves one or 

more specific actions required for agricultural and rural transformation in Punjab. Each DLI was 

selected based on: (1) the criticality of the activity, output, or outcome in the results chain; (2) 

the need to introduce a financial incentive to deliver the activity, outcome, or output; (3) 

measurability and ease of verification; and (4) the capacity of GoPunjab to achieve the DLIs over 

the period that SMART Punjab is implemented. Table 4 represents the Results Area and brief 

description of DLI.  

 

23. The four DLIs under Results Area 1 (increased on-farm productivity and value of 
agriculture and livestock) will be achieved by supporting SMART reforms in the policy regime 

for agriculture (crops and livestock) and reorienting public expenditures from subsidies toward 

targeted investments to improve crop and livestock productivity.  
 DLI 1: Improving access to quality farm inputs. Better targeting of subsidies, particularly for fertilizers, to 

small-scale farmers would increase overall production; it would also help smallholders to close the yield gap 



11 

 

with larger producers and reduce poverty. This DLI will be measured by tracking the number of small farmers 

(<5 hectares) enrolled in the E-voucher Scheme for fertilizers. 

 DLI 2: Revitalizing provincial crop and livestock research and extension systems. A comprehensive, 
strategically relevant policy for agricultural and livestock research and extension will be designed. Over time, 

funding for public research would increase (measured as the percentage of AgGDP spent on research), along 

with the role of the private sector (measured by the composition of the Punjab Agriculture Research Board and 

the percentage of research grants awarded on a competitive basis).  

 DLI 3: Improving livestock health and breeding. Resources will shift from curative to preventive animal 
healthcare (measured by the ratio of expenditures on preventive and curative medicine) to reduce losses to 

disease. Good breeding stock is essential to improve productivity (measured by the number of breeding animals).  

 DLI 4: Modernizing the wheat marketing system and transitioning to high-value agriculture. Deregulating 
the wheat market would reduce wheat and flour prices and free land for HVA (substantially raising farm incomes 

and employment)—measured by the official notification that GoPunjab is withdrawing from the wheat market, 

subsequent phasing out of government wheat procurement, and the percentage of the Agriculture allocation in 

the ADP to HVA schemes. An additional measure is approval of the Punjab Agriculture Policy, which is 

expected to provide further strategic directions for agricultural policy.  

24. The four DLIs under Results Area 2 (increased value addition and competitiveness 
of agriculture and livestock) will be achieved through policy and institutional reforms, as well 

as by marshalling public support for private investors, mainly through a matching grant scheme. 
 DLI 5: Providing incentives to agribusiness for investment in value addition. SMART Punjab will contribute 

US$ 10 million to an Agribusiness and Innovation Fund to be set up by GoPunjab. The fund will award matching 

grants, with particular consideration for women and young people, on a competitive basis (measured by the 

number of matching grants awarded for agribusiness). 

 DLI 6: Deregulating the livestock sector. Removing meat and raw milk price caps (measured by the 
discontinuation of notification of meat and milk prices) would stimulate production and marketing of better 

quality and safer livestock products, raising producers’ incomes and increasing supplies for urban areas.  

 DLI 7: Modernizing agricultural markets. Reforming wholesale market legislation to allow greater private 
sector participation and enhance transparency (measured by approval and notification of the Punjab Agricultural 

Marketing Regulatory Authority Act) would reduce margins taken by middlemen and commission agents and 

reduce the government’s role in controlling these markets.  

 DLI 8: Improving food safety. Better food and agricultural standards, backed by testing and enforcement 
mechanisms, would improve the quality of food products and public health, and address concerns about 

contaminated or adulterated products. This DLI will be measured by tracking progress in establishing and 

operationalizing a provincial food testing reference laboratory as well as regional and mobile laboratories.  

25. The four DLIs under Results Area 3 (enhanced resilience of smallholder farmers to 
climate change and natural disasters) will be achieved by improving the management and 

sustainability of water resources, designing and extending the coverage of improved agricultural 

insurance products for different kinds of producers, and public investment in CSA. 
 DLI 9: Improving sustainability of irrigation M&R. More equitable access to water and better assessment and 

collection of abiana would encourage producers to use water more efficiently with no increases in overall water 

use, and increase funds for M&R. Adoption of a provincial water policy and groundwater act are important first 

steps in addressing the overexploitation of water, falling groundwater tables, and increasing salinization. This 

DLI would be measured by approval of the Punjab Water Policy, notification of the 2017 Punjab Groundwater 

Act, improvements in the area assessed for abiana, tracking abiana collection rates, and water delivery 

performance ratios (defined as actual amount of water delivered divided by amount delivered as per canal 

design, measured at different points along the canal and relative to the delivery performance at the head of the 

canal). 

 DLI 10: Rolling-out an agricultural insurance system. Crop insurance can help crop producers stabilize 
incomes and sustain resilience when natural events deplete harvests. The World Bank submitted a feasibility 

report detailing a suitable crop insurance scheme to GoPunjab in July 2017. This DLI will be measured by 

official government approval of the report, development and notification of a workplan aligned with the report’s 

recommendations, piloting a crop insurance scheme in two districts, and rolling out the scheme in all districts.  



12 

 

 DLI 11: Increasing public investment in CSA. Enhancing public investment in CSA would help farmers adopt 
new technologies and approaches and reduce potential losses related to climate change, measured by tracking the 

percentage allocation of Agriculture in the ADP for CSA schemes. 

 DLI 12: Communications, capacity building, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). A substantial 
communications strategy and capacity-building program will mobilize support for agricultural and rural 

transformation among stakeholders into the future. Strengthening M&E capacity in participating departments 

will facilitate monitoring of progress. This DLI will be measured by development and implementation of annual 

capacity development plans. 

 

 Environmental and Social Effects 

26. An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) was prepared for 
SMART Punjab. The assessment incorporates feedback from all stakeholders (governmental, 

non-governmental, producers) and presents recommendations and actions to address 

environmental and social risks associated with the Program. The main actions are included in the 

PAP and some of these constitute dated legal covenants. 

 

27. Environmental risks are Moderate. In general, the expected environment impacts from 
Program activities are assessed as medium to low. Environmental concerns include the 

possibility of increases in use of chemicals due to the shift from conventional crops to HVA; 

institutional capacity for effective environmental management; and environmental compliance 

by micro and small enterprises and food safety testing laboratories. SMART Punjab promulgates 

reforms and related actions that promote balanced fertilizer use, improved water resource 

regulation and efficiency, increased land productivity, agricultural insurance, and CSA. The 

Program is not expected to support large infrastructure except wheat storage facilities which are 

subject to EIA preparation. The Program will involve no expansion of the irrigation network but 

rather promote water resource efficiency. The Program will also not support expansion of 

agricultural land but contribute to increased land productivity. Improvements in animal health 

combined with deregulation of livestock prices would benefit public health. Improvements in 

animal breeding will relieve pressure on rangelands. Crop residue burning and application of 

untreated wastewater for irrigation are important environmental issues related to agriculture but 

not targeted by the proposed Program. 

 

28. Social risks are Substantial. The key social risks include (i) access to program benefits 
for vulnerable and marginalized groups, and (ii) potential social conflict. Smallholders and 

marginalized or vulnerable groups may find accessing some elements of SMART Punjab more 

challenging than other stakeholders — e.g. HVA, the E-voucher scheme, and matching grants. 

These groups may require special support, ranging from technical assistance, training, two-way 

communication, and social mobilization strategies. Phasing out of the wheat procurement system 

while lowering the wheat price thus benefiting the >90% of households who are net wheat 

buyers, may face strong opposition from large wheat growers. The Bank has agreed to provide 

significant technical assistance to assist the Food Department in mitigating social risk associated 

with wheat market reform. Attempts to improve abiana assessment and increase abiana 

collection are likely to meet resistance. Removal of price caps while having beneficial impacts 

on public health and incomes of livestock owners (most of them women), may also negatively 

impact consumption of fresh milk in low income households, unless preceded by an engagement 

strategy in which stakeholders are informed of the benefits of deregulation well in advance and 

milk producers can move towards increasing supply capacity in anticipation of better prices. An 



13 

 

effective conflict mitigation and awareness strategy must be in place to ensure that reforms do 

not lead to marginalization and conflict. No significant land acquisition is envisioned under the 

Program. 

 

29. With regard to grievance redress mechanisms, communities and individuals who 
believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank-supported PforR operation, as 

defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to program grievance 

redress mechanisms or the World Bank Grievance Redress Service. The Grievance Redress 

Service ensures that complaints are promptly reviewed to address pertinent concerns. Affected 

communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank’s independent Inspection 

Panel, which determines whether harm occurred or could occur as a result of the Bank’s non-

compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after 

concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has 

been given an opportunity to respond. To submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate 

Grievance Redress Service, visit www.worldbank.org/grs. To submit complaints to the World 

Bank Inspection Panel, visit www.inspectionpanel.org.  

 

30. In sum, although the proposed operation will undertake or support no activities of high 
risk from an environmental or social perspective, and although federal and provincial 

environmental and social management systems are appropriate, social management procedures 

require strengthening with respect to gender and the poor, conflict management, and two-way 

public engagement. Certain departments need to strengthen their grievance redress systems. The 

Environmental Section of P&D should be strengthened because P&D, having primary 

responsibility for coordinating and monitoring the Program, is in charge of environmental 

screening. For activities that require an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or an Initial 

Environmental Examination (IEE), the relevant implementing agencies should coordinate with 

District Environment Officers. 

 Financing 

31. The financing framework for the activities under the three Results Areas includes 
two sources of finance: (i) GoPunjab budget; and (ii) SMART Punjab PforR (Table 3). 

32. In addition, a significant portion out of 
GoPunjab’s spending on subsidies is expected to 

be diverted towards investment in agriculture 

and livestock when the program is fully 

implemented by 2021. The GoPunjab has already 

substantially increased the capital investment 

allocation for agriculture and livestock in 

anticipation of such savings becoming available. 

33. Budgetary allocations for agriculture and livestock are considered sufficient and 
together with acceptable historical budget execution rates provide enough confidence that 

the intended results of the SMART program will be achieved. The government’s expenditure 

framework is sufficiently aligned with the SMART program to achieve the intended results. 

 

Table 3: Financing of SMART program (US$ m) 

Source Amount % of total 

Punjab Government
 

1290 81 

PforR 300 19 

Total Program 

financing 

1,590 100 


 Program Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

34. The Departments of Agriculture, Livestock & Dairy Development, Food, Irrigation, 
Industries, Finance, and P&D are responsible for implementing the SMART Punjab 

Program. Each department will have a dedicated Program Delivery Unit (PDU) or a Focal 

Person, depending upon the workload. Each PDU will include current departmental staff, 

supplemented by consultants as needed. Some departments have dedicated PDUs; others will 

establish them.
2
 The Member Agriculture (P&D Department) will act as the Program 

Coordinator for SMART Punjab in the Program Coordination and Monitoring Unit (PCMU), 

assisted by the Chief Agriculture as Deputy Manager. The PCMU which has been established 

under the Punjab Resource Management Program in the P&D Department and also coordinates 

the Jobs & Competitiveness PforR, will coordinate with the seven implementing agencies, 

monitor and evaluate implementation, and report to the Bank in accordance with the terms and 

conditions of the Financing and Program Agreements. It will consolidate reports of all 

implementing agencies and communicate them to the Bank; to do so, it will develop a standard 

template for monitoring and reporting progress. The PCMU will also coordinate with the 

Independent Verification Agency for verifying achievement of DLIs and reporting, and will 

establish an Assignment Account to manage technical assistance funding supported by the 

PforR. The Finance and P&D Departments will ensure that PforR resources are adequately 

budgeted for in their annual budget and disbursed in line with the expenditure framework to 

accomplish the DLIs.   

 

35. A SMART Steering Committee (SC) was established in September 2016. The SC has 
played a constructive role throughout preparation, especially in guiding and confirming policy 

reforms and institutional changes. Headed by the Chief Minister, Punjab, it includes 

administrative heads from all implementing agencies, other key stakeholders, and representatives 

from the Bank (including the Senior Director and Country Director) as observers. The SC will 

provide strategic guidance and direction, facilitate coordination between the seven implementing 

agencies, and oversee progress in all three Results Areas and DLIs on a quarterly basis as 

reported by the PCMU. To ensure effective implementation, the SC may refer any major 

implementation challenge or matter requiring a policy decision for guidance to the three high-

level committees (Secretaries’ Committee, Commissioners’ Conference, and DCO Committee) 

chaired by the Chief Secretary. 

 

36. SMART Punjab will coordinate and collaborate with other programs. It will create 
synergies with Bank projects in Punjab—including the Punjab Irrigated-agriculture Productivity 

Improvement Project (PIPIP) and the Jobs & Competitiveness PforR (P155963)—and operations 

of development partners.
3
 National entities with supporting roles include: (1) the Auditor 

                                                 
2
 The Agriculture Delivery Unit (ADU) will act as PDU in the Agriculture Department; the Statistical Planning and Reform Unit will act as PDU 

in the Irrigation Department; and the Food and Livestock & Dairy Development Departments will establish PDUs or (in the case of the Industries 

and Finance Departments) Focal Persons before appraisal. At a minimum, PDUs will be staffed by a Procurement Specialist, Financial Specialist, 

Communications Specialist, M&E Specialist, and Internal Audit Specialist, aside from the appropriate technical specialists. PDUs are responsible 
for procurement (tender documents, advertising, bid evaluation and award of contracts), FM, internal audit, communications, M&E, and 

environmental and social management. PDUs will report as required to the PCMU, including: (1) an annual investment plan for their department; 

(2) Terms of reference (ToRs) for consultancy services; (3) an annual procurement plan; (4) reports on implementation progress for each DLI 
under the Program; (5) Program Financial Statements, including procurement, if any; (6) internal audit reports; and (7) implementation of the 

communications strategy. 
3
 For example, the Food and Agriculture Organization (with the recently approved Technical Cooperation Project—Support for the formulation 

of projects for Strengthening Markets and Rural Transformation (SMART) Initiatives in Punjab, Pakistan), USAID (particularly the Punjab 



16 

 

General of Pakistan for the annual external audit of the Program; (2) the Punjab Public 

Procurement Regulatory Authority, which will provide technical guidance on public 

procurement and monitor compliance with procurement standards and practices; and (3) the 

National Accountability Bureau, which will investigate complaints on fraud and corruption (if 

any) relating to the Program. 

 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Henan Green Agriculture Finance Fund (P169758) 

 
 

  
May 22, 2019 Page 1 of 9  

 

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2019 | Report No: PIDC26846 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

China P169758  Henan Green 
Agriculture Finance 
Fund (P169758) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Oct 15, 2019 Mar 26, 2020 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Henan Agriculture 
Development Financing 
Investment Corporation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The proposed objective of the project is to strengthen the green agriculture initiatives in Henan. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 400.00 

Total Financing 400.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 200.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Other Sources 200.00 

          Borrowing Agency 200.00 

   
 


Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Since start of the reforms China has embarked successful rural transformation, which has stimulated economic growth 
and urbanization. On the other hand, broad-based economic growth, urbanization and industrialization have further 
enhanced rural transformation.  Over the last two decades over 200 million rural people have moved to urban areas to 
engage in labor-intensive industrial jobs.  Today about 58 percent of the Chinese population lives in urban areas, up from 
just 16 percent in 1960.  More than one billion Chinese – that is, 70 percent of the projected 1.5 billion population – are 
expected to live in urban areas by 2030.  Urbanization will increase aggregate demand for food as urban population 
consume more higher value products, especially meat, dairy, fruits and vegetables, as well as processed food.  
 
However, urbanization is also expected to increase the pressures on the agri-food systems in China through increasing gap 
between food demand and environmental supply limits. Addressing the latter requires managing pressures on intensive 
margins to increase productivity per unit of land, and on extensive margin to produce more high value food.  The largest 
environmental pressures come from primary agricultural production stage, which is dominated by large number of small-
scale production units. China is the world’s largest producers and user of synthetic nitrogenous fertilizer, both on an 
absolute and per hectare basis.  The consumption of agricultural fertilizers in China was 58 million tons in 2017.  Grain 
production is the leading user of chemical fertilizers at aggregate level, although the highest rates of fertilizer application 
generally occur in fruit and vegetable production. It has been estimated that only around 25% of nitrogen is taken up by 
crops in China compared to 50% in Europe and almost 70% in the U.S. and Canada, with the remainder running off into 
water sources or entering the air as nitrous oxide.  Ammonia emissions from inefficient use of N fertilizers contribute 
around 10% of the air pollution (PM2.5) over the North China Plain and Pearl and Yangtze River Deltas. According to the 
first census on national pollution source in 2010, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), Total Nitrogen (TN) and Total 
Phosphorus (TP) are major sources of pollutants from agriculture sector. While COD mainly comes from livestock sector, 
accounting for 96% the total emissions, TN and TP are primarily attributable to overuse of fertilizers in crop sector, 
accounting for 38% and 59% of the total emissions. The consumption of pesticides in China was about 1.8 million tons per 
year in 2015, and it has been estimated that only about 30% of it was utilized by crops. Soil and water pollution are also 
threat to the environment and food safety.  While industrial pollution is a leading source of soil and water contamination, 
the overuse of pesticides is also a significant contributor (about 10 million hectares of farmland are affected by overuse 
of pesticides). Heavy use of pesticides has been especially common in rice, vegetable, and tea production. Addressing 
above environmental management and pollution control in agriculture, requires thus a simultaneous attention on the 
modernization of farming systems, while meeting increasing consumer demand for nutrition, high quality and safe food.  
 
Chinese agriculture is also the largest producer of agriculture related greenhouse gases (GHGs) in the world, accounting 
for about 13% of total global agricultural GHG emissions. Overall, primary agriculture sector accounted for about 11% of 



China’s GHG emissions - third largest source of GHGs in China after energy and industry. Agriculture is major source of 
methane (from rice and livestock manure) and nitrous oxide (from manure and use of N fertilizers). Livestock, particularly 
cattle and pig rearing, is single largest sub-sector contributing to nearly 15.5 percent of total human induced GHG 
emissions in the country. There is evidence that climate change itself is contributing to increasing pressures on Chinese 
food production systems and already limited water and land resources. Further, climate change is also expected to 
exacerbate exposure of agricultural produce to pathogens and toxins that will increase the risk of food borne diseases. 
 
Henan is an important agricultural province in China. It is the largest producer of livestock and the second largest producer 
of grains (6.8 million ha of arable land) in China. It produces also a significant quantities of oil crops, fruits and vegetables.  
The total manure discharges from livestock industry has risen since 1990, reaching about 253 million tons per year. The 
increase is largely contributed to the rapid growth of pig and cattle production since 1990s as a response to increasing 
demand for meat. Pork industry accounts for 50.1% of the total manure discharges, followed by cattle 28.1%, and poultry 
with 12.6%. The consumption of pesticides in Henan was 128,700 tons in 2015 (the second largest after Shandong 
province), while the consumption of chemical fertilizers reached 7.06 million tons in 2017 (the largest in China). Grains, 
fruits and vegetables are the major users of fertilizers, accounting for 82.8% of total crop fertilizer consumptions.  Total 
COD discharges in Henan were 10.2 million tons, most of which come from livestock sector, while crop sector mas a major 
contributor of TN with 93,500 tons and TP discharges with 5,300 tons (NBS, 2017). Total GHG emissions from agriculture 
in Henan increased from 16.6 million tons in 1999 to 18 million tons in 2015 (9%).  Livestock sector was the biggest 
contributor to GHG emissions, followed by fertilizer use and soil management.  Henan has thus a good potential to reduce 
environmental footprint from agriculture (both at national level and globally) and contribute to the production of safe, 
high quality and nutritious food. The proposed project aims to support the transformation of Henan agriculture sector 
towards more resource-efficient, environmentally sustainable, and climate smart development path, which is expected to 
reduce agriculture’s environmental footprint and increase agri-food safety. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
Transformation of Chinese agri-food systems towards more sustainable development path requires massive financing 
from financial institutions (both public and private) and private sector (e.g. agribusinesses, capital funds, etc.). However, 
financial sector institutions in China have lent a disproportionately lower share of their loan portfolios to agriculture, 
compared to agriculture sector’s share of GDP. The growth and deepening of agriculture finance markets is constrained 
by a variety of factors which include: (i) low profitability, (ii) collateral requirements, (iii) covariance of production, market, 
and price risks and absence of adequate market-based instruments to manage risks, (iv) fragmentation of value chains, (v) 
high perception of risks, etc.  
 
China has put in place policy environment which is conducive for the development of green agriculture financing to 
encourage transformation of its agri-food systems towards more sustainable development path. In 2018, the Government 
formulated its Rural Revitalization Strategy (RRS) which aims to create more modern and resource efficient production 
structures, while ensuring environmental sustainability and safety of agri-produce.  Promoting green agriculture is an 
important aspect of the RRS which provides the package of policies and incentives to encourage higher-quality agricultural 
development, strengthening environmental protection and pollution control in rural areas, while ensuring the quality of 
poverty-reduction efforts.  Other key goals of Government’s sustainable agriculture development plans include: (i) zero 
growth of chemical fertilizers and pesticides by 2020; (ii) control of methane emissions from rice fields and nitrous oxide 
emissions from farmland; and (iii) adoption of recyclable agricultural systems that includes reutilization of animal waste. 
These efforts also aim improved resource use efficiency (water, energy, natural resources) and improved environmental 
governance. The structural changes promoted through above policies, such as consolidation of livestock industry and 
transfer of farm land to more professional entities (agribusinesses, farmer cooperatives, etc.), better access to new 

 

technologies, and increasing resilience of production systems through more professional management practices could 
harbinger new opportunities for access to agriculture finance.  
 
China introduced Green Credit Policy in 2007 to encourage financial institutions to offer green credit for environmental 
protection, emission reduction, and energy conservation projects. However, little progress has been made in green 
agriculture finance, largely due lack of clarity in the definition of what constitutes “green”, the incipient nature of many 
potential innovations (e.g. enhanced efficiency fertilizers, etc.), and risk aversion towards the sector. Only few banks 
currently engage in green agricultural finance which is quite narrowly defined to cover organic agriculture and livestock, 
seed production, and animal breeding. The aggregate national level green finance portfolio is about $1.2 trillion of green 
credit and $ 89 billion in green bonds, most which has gone to energy, urban water, transport and industrial sectors where 
commercial investments options and technologies are relatively well defined. Total green finance for agriculture is about 
$9 billion or only 0.4% from aggregate national green finance.  Banks with larger loan portfolios in green agricultural credit 
are Agricultural Bank of China, Agricultural Development Bank and Postal Savings Bank.   
 
There are signs of emerging policy guidance for streamlining green financing for agriculture in China.  In 2018, the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Rural Affairs (MARA) issued the Notice on the Technical Guide for Green Agriculture Development 
(2018-2030) outlining range of investments to accelerate the pace of green input creation, improve green technology 
supply, establish green development system and low carbon model, build or enhance green standards system, formulate 
the monitoring and early warning mechanism of agricultural resources, environment and ecology. However, on the policy 
side, there are currently little incentives for financial institutions to increase their lending for green agriculture investments 
beyond showing adherence with the PBOC green finance guidelines and counting towards their CSR activities.   
 
The demand of agriculture and agribusiness for green financing will be driven either by commercial opportunities or by 
stringent regulations. Some investments that increase the environmental efficiency of agriculture and agri-processing such 
as investments in precision agriculture or investments in energy efficient processing facilities are profitable on their own 
right, requiring mainly technical assistance and access to financing to be adopted by farms and firms.   On the other end, 
some environmentally necessary investments such as those related to the treatment of residual waste, water pollutants 
and livestock manure do not generate significant private income, although they significantly contribute to public welfare. 
The adoption of such investments thus depends on the existence of adequate regulations and enforcement mechanisms 
to ensure that they are adopted. It is expected that the 14th 5YP will bring increased push for more stringent enforcement 
of environmental and pollution control regulations, including agriculture. This should generate important new policy 
incentives to foster the demand for environmentally sustainable growth models and investments. 
 
Increasing demand for high quality, nutritious and safe food has created renewed private sector interest to invest in 
Chinese agri-food sector, which provides scope to harness green agriculture finance.  This renewed interest is creating 
new opportunities for financial institutions which would need to develop the right skills to capture opportunities in 
investing in green agriculture.  At the same time, emerging evidence obtained from CBRC shows that while agricultural 
loan NPLs in China are around 7%, NPLs for organic agriculture (one type of green agriculture) are only 3.5% indicating 
that lending to green agriculture could potentially be less risky.  There is thus an opportunity to create new  financial 
markets for agriculture green investments by equipping financial institutions with global knowledge of green agriculture 
finance standards, financing instruments, innovative risk measurement and control systems, and providing them tools to 
build a pipeline of bankable green agricultural investments for financing which could enhance their capacity and risk-
taking ability for expanding  green finance to agriculture sector in China over coming years.    
 

 

Relationship to CPF 
 
The proposed Henan Green Agriculture Financing Fund Project is fully aligned with the World Bank’s Country Partnership 
Strategy (Report 67566-CN) for China (FY2013–16), discussed by the Board on November 6, 2012 and the new CPF under 
preparation consistent under its expected objective of demonstrating sustainable agriculture practices and improving food 
system quality and safety.  The relevant criteria from capital increase paper which apply to the proposed project include:  
 

• Strengthening of institutional capacities for the graduation (development of the capacity to identify and manage 
green agriculture investments); 

• Delivering regional and global public goods (e.g., financing climate smart agriculture, climate change mitigation or 
adaptation in agriculture, etc.); and 

• Introducing innovative institutional and technical solutions to emerging challenges that can provide lessons for 
other middle-income countries (e.g., financing climate smart agriculture and pollution control, etc.).  

 
The project places emphasis on institutional and financing innovations for inclusive and green growth agenda contributing 
to enhanced economic opportunities in rural areas, addressing environmental pollution and climate change under the CPF 
pillar of promoting more inclusive development. Further, the proposed project would have the potential for generating 
high climate co-benefits and contributing to the achievement of China’s agriculture-related Nationally Determined 
Commitments (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement. 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The proposed objective of the project is to strengthen the green agriculture initiatives in Henan.  
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
• Increased volume and value of green agriculture investments (particularly attracting more social capital); 
• Increased awareness among key stakeholders about green agriculture investment opportunities; and 
• Enhanced institutional capacity for managing green investments portfolio. 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
The selected lending instrument is an Intermediary Financing (FI). The proposed IBRD funding is $200 million, with at least 
same amount being raised from social capital and other funding sources. The proposed project will have two components, 
the first one providing the funding for investments in eligible green agriculture sub-projects and the second one providing 
technical assistance.   
 
Component 1: Green Agriculture Fund (GAF). The project will establish a dedicated investment facility to demonstrate the 
viability of a financing vehicle in Henan, which will operate in a transparent manner conforming to market principles on 
sustainable basis. This facility will provide direct support to eligible firms with ‘patient capital’ using ‘blended finance 
options’. Direct investments by GAF will aim to leverage to the extent possible private and commercial capital from social 
capital partners (i.e. local commercial banks, private investment firms and financial institutions).  
 
 
Component 2: Technical Assistance (IBRD financing $20 million). The project will support the Henan Agriculture 
Development Financing Investment Corporation (HADFIC) and its social capital partners in building their institutional 

 

capacity in managing green agriculture investment cycle including: pipeline development, investment policies, 
implementation guidelines and monitoring mechanisms meeting prudential and regulatory requirements under the 
framework for green financial system.  
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
Overall, the project will bring about positive environmental and social benefits in terms of reducing the pollution from 
agricultural productions, reducing the GHG emissions, and reducing health risk for consumers by improving the food 
safety and quality. As the project will involve small or medium size civil works for processing and/or storage facilities, the 
potential environmental impacts in construction phase may include the dust, noise, solid waste, and wastewater, and 
social disturbance, such as the traffic safety. Other potential adverse environmental impacts could include noise, dust, 
solid waste, wastewater generated from the manufacturing of equipment, high-efficiency fertilizers and biocides as well 
as processing of agro-products; occupational health concern regarding the mechanical damage by operating machine 
tools, inhaling fine particles in processing of agro-products, and toxicity by production, storage and use of biocides which 
is albeit low toxic to human beings. The probability for such risks is very low, and the impacts are small given their size. In 
addition, the use of multi-resistant varieties will cause a concern on both environemntal and social aspects. However, the 
specific information is not clear for these varieties at current concept stage. The criteria for assessing and excluding any 
invasive species and screening for risk categorization will be developed in the ESMS. The potential environmental 
impacts are mostly temporary, predictable and/or reversible, and the nature of the Project does not preclude the 
possibility of avoiding or reversing them. They are medium in magnitude and/or in spatial extent. These adverse impacts 
can be readily and reliably managed through the environmental mitigation hierarchy. As per the Environmental and 
Social Directive, the environmental risk for this project is classified as Substantial.  
 
The main social risks and impacts for the project are related to (a) land acquisition and resettlement for establishing 
facilities and structures by targeted enterprises, (b) leasing of land use rights (LUR) and land consolidation for 
appropriate-scale farming, (c) management of direct workers and primary supplier workers, and (d) community health 
and safety and (e) social implications (positive, negative or perceived) relating use of multi-resistant varieties. Land 
acquisition and resettlement would happen upfront before determination of the sub-projects; however, documentation 
should be provided to ensure compliance with national regulations. According to ESS9, the FIs will categorize any sub-
project which involves resettlement as High or Substantial risk (unless the risks or impacts of such resettlement are 
minor). Leasing of LUR, different from involuntary land acquisition and resettlement, is carried out at village level and 
Henan has put in place relatively sound laws and regulations to facilitate this process. However, the level of regulation 
enforcement could vary from one village to another in terms of public consultation, and arrangement of rental 
payments. Adequacy of current system is subject to further assessment. The project would introduce a few direct 
workers and the number of primary supplier workers, which could potentially increase the risks related to working 
conditions and community health and safety, if not well managed. Use of multi-resistant varieties would induce social 
implications which will be further assessed when “green agriculture” is defined under this project and there are more 
information on project activities. Based on possible social risks associated with the leasing of LUR and until relevant 
national and provincial systems and practices governing such activities are fully assessed, the overall social risk of the 



























































World Bank Document



COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC17964

Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Jul-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: India Project ID: P158522
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization Project (P158522)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

15-Feb-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Republic of India
Implementing 
Agency:

Water Resources Organization, Public Works Department, GoTN

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
Borrower 136.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 318.00
Total Project Cost 454.00

Environmental 
Category:

A - Full Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 
(as needed):

The Decision Review Meeting discussed the risk ratings of the project and 
agreed to the proposed overall project risk rating of Moderate.  The review 
meeting discussed project safeguard issues and agreed with the 
proposed classification as Category A in view of potential issues related to dam 
safety, increased pesticides and fertilizer usage. The safeguard responsibility will 
remain with RSA.

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
India in recent years witnessed impressive economic growth and poverty alleviation. During the 
past decade, India's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew at 7.6% annually and poverty incidence 
reduced on average by 1.5 percentage points per year during 2005-10. Also,improvements in key 
development indicators have been remarkable: life expectancy increased from 31 years in 1947 to 
68 years in 2015 and adult literacy increased from 18% in 1951 to 71% in 2015. 
 
Despite such impressive progress in economic growth, poverty alleviation, and improved human 
development indicators, India remains home to 263 million poor people (80% of whom reside in 
rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day and the country is still at the bottom of the group of 
middle-income countries. To address these challenges, the Government of India (GoI) through its 
12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013-17) put forward an ambitious goal for economic growth, poverty 
reduction, job creation, and environmental management. The plan foresees during this period an 
annual GDP growth of 8.2%, a reduction in poverty rate by 10 percentage points, and 50 million 
of new jobs.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
Tamil Nadu is the second largest state economy in India with one of fastest growth rates: over the 
past three years its Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) grew at 9.2% per annum.  The average 
annual per capita income of the state is around INR 61,500 (at 2010/2011constant prices), which 
is around 42% higher than the national average. Tamil Nadu is also the most urbanized state in 
India with around 48% of population living in cities. 
 
Agriculture and allied sectors in Tamil Nadu account for 12% of the state's GSDP. About 40% of 
state's population is dependent on agriculture for their employment and more than two thirds of 
state's poor people live in rural areas and are engaged in predominately in agriculture activities. 
The majority of farmers are small and marginal with average family landholdings of 0.83 ha. The 
main crops are rice, maize, pulses, groundnut, sugar cane, vegetables, and banana. Rice dominates 
both consumption and agriculture production accounting for 34% of total gross cropped area and 
60% of irrigated area. Due to seasonality and scarcity of water supply, cultivation is mostly 
limited to only one crop per plot per year. 
 
Tamil Nadu is one of the driest and most water stressed states of India with average annual 
rainfall of 925 millimeters, which is well below the national average of 1,200 millimeters. Per 
capita availability of water in the state is around 900 cubic meters a year compared with the 
national average of 2,100 cubic meters.  The agriculture sector in Tamil Nadu is highly exposed 
to climatic risks, especially droughts, floods, cyclones, and erratic rainfall, which have frequently 
affected the performance of agricultural sector in the past. The dry season lasts five months 
(January through May) even in good years, and droughts occur in three out of ten years.  Climate 
change is likely to exacerbate the vulnerability of agricultural sector with increasing erratic 
weather patterns and climatic shifts.  A clear example is the consequence of devastating floods 
that occurred in November-December 2015, which severely damaged irrigation infrastructures in 
three districts and affected Chennai, the capital city of Tamil Nadu as well. 
 
The state is heavily dependent on irrigated agriculture and over the years an impressive inventory 
of irrigation and water infrastructure was built in the state. There are 89 major reservoirs, 39,000 
tanks (traditional water harvesting structures) and 3 million wells. Irrigated agriculture is the 


largest consumer of water in the State accounting for 75% of total water usage. About 3 million 
ha of land (54% of total crop land) is under irrigation with different sources of water: 30% of total 
irrigated area is under canal irrigation, 21% is under tank irrigation, and 49% is irrigated by wells. 
 
In recent years the state's agriculture sector has grown modestly at less than 3% per annum 
compared with 6-9% growth of the state's economy. The productivity of major crops has largely 
stagnated:  the current average yields of rice and maize are slightly higher than the national 
average, the average yields of vegetables, cotton, and pulses are lower than the national average. 
To unlock the full potential of agriculture sector growth, there is a strong need for policies and 
programs to focus on: (i) improvement of water use efficiency; (ii) intensification of cropping 
systems and diversification into high value crops; (iii) enhancement of post-harvest management 
and value addition; and (iv) improvement of the resilience of agriculture system in order to deal 
with increasing threats of climate change. 
 
The Bank-supported Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization and Water-Bodies 
Restoration and Management Project (TN IAMWARMP), which was concluded in 2015, has had 
a significant development impact in the state by modernizing irrigation infrastructure, improving 
water use efficiency, enhancing yields and productivity of agriculture, livestock and fisheries, and 
promoting diversification to high value crops. It also supported the introduction of participatory 
irrigation management in the state and the establishment of water users associations (WUAs). 
Under the project 5,300 tanks and irrigation supply canals were rehabilitated and modernized, and 
2,800 WUAs were established resulting in increases of fully irrigated areas by 39% and water 
conveyance efficiency by more than 30%. The total area under high value crop was also doubled. 
Moreover, the project helped the state improve its water resource planning and implementation 
capacities.  These achievements and lessons learned during implementation of TN IAMWARMP 
serve as a good base for further enhancing the performance of irrigated agriculture in the state 
through the proposed project.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 
FY2013-17 to support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in India. In line with the pillar for 
Transformation, the project promotes inclusive rural growth, development and dissemination of 
new agricultural technologies, climate-resilient agriculture, enhanced market linkages for small 
and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource management. Further the 
proposed project will have a positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced 
greenhouse gas emissions by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and promoting 
diversification into high value crops, which significantly reduce water consumption. 
 
The proposed project will contribute to the Inclusion pillar of CSP by enhancing the livelihoods 
of small and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market access, and also by 
improving disaster management abilities of GoTN and the local communities through the 
enhanced design and restoration of irrigation infrastructure with better flood protection features.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
To enhance agriculture productivity, water use efficiency, climate resilience of irrigated 
agriculture and increase post-harvest value-addition for smallholder farmers and agro-
entrepreneurs in Tamil Nadu. 

The project beneficiaries are farmers, including small and marginal, water users associations, 
farmer producer organizations, and other entrepreneurs.

Key Results (From PCN)
The key project indicators (KPI) will be: 
 
(i) Increase in water use efficiency (resilience, water use efficiency); 
(ii) Increase in agricultural productivity (productivity); 
(iii) Increase in areas cultivated by non-paddy crops (diversification and value added);  
(iv) Adoption of resilient technologies and practices (resilience); and  
(v) Total number of project beneficiaries (including number of female beneficiaries).

D.  Concept Description

The design of the proposed project will include innovative aspects that build on lessons learned 
from TN IAMWARMP and also reflect the evolving needs of the state when it comes to 
modernization of irrigated agriculture. These include improved designs of irrigation 
infrastructure, stronger focus on the demand-side of irrigation with aim to improve water-use 
efficiency, further advances in agricultural diversification, agri-entrepreneurship, and movement 
toward climate resilient agriculture with relevant agriculture-water related investments and 
substantial improvements of participatory irrigation management practices by beneficiaries.  
Improved resilience of agriculture production systems is expected to be achieved under the 
project through e.g. higher water use efficiency, increased adoption of sustainable technologies 
and practices, and enhanced diversification of production systems. Activities under the project 
will be duly complimented by use of innovative ICT and new media technologies for enhanced 
efficiencies and faster turnaround time for delivering services to project beneficiaries.  As 
requested by GoTN, the project is also expected to finance on-retroactive basis, rehabilitation and 
modernization of tanks and other irrigation infrastructures damaged by the flooding of 
November/-December 2015 floods in three districts of Tamil Nadu. 
 
The total project cost is expected to be around US$454 million, of which the Bank will finance 
$318 million (70% of total project cost) and the GoTN will finance US$ 136 million (30% of total 
project cost). The project activities will cover the entire state of Tamil Nadu (its individual 
components will cover different geographic areas) and will be implemented over seven year 
period.    The project activities would be grouped into three main components: (i) Agriculture 
Water Management; (ii) Agriculture Productivity Enhancement, Diversification, and Value 
Addition; and (iii) Project Management Support. The individual components are summarized 
below: 
 
Component A: Irrigation and Water Management 
 
This component addresses irrigation and water management in a holistic fashion by covering both 
supply and demand simultaneously.  It consists of four inter-related sub-components, including: 
(i) institutional strengthening and capacity building of water management; (ii) irrigation systems 
modernization; (iii) participatory irrigation management;   and (iv) converged service delivery at 
the grass-root level.     
 
Sub-component A.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of Water Management 
 


This subcomponent aims to assist the GoTN in addressing the pressing water sector issues, 
including: (i) need for integrated water resources planning, bulk water allocations  and 
management in a basin context, involving all water using sub-sectors to improve the efficiency 
and productivity of limited water resources; (ii) need to improve the knowledge base and 
instruments; (iii) need to improve the financial sustainability of water sector assets, and cost 
effective reliable service delivery; and (iv) need to promote participatory irrigation service 
management. These will be done through strengthening of capacities for enhancing policy 
analysis and implementation, knowledge base, analytical capacity, staff mobility, filling of subject 
matter specialists/experts gap, technology induction, office facilities, and related technical/
logistical support.  
 
Sub-component A.2: Irrigation Systems Modernization 
 
This sub-component will modernize irrigation infrastructures, including tanks, and irrigation 
canals.  The modernization of irrigation infrastructure will focus on improving the bulk water 
delivery to irrigation systems through rehabilitation and modernization of approximately 4,800 
tanks, and 477 anicuts in 66 sub-basins out of total 127 sub-basins.  Activities under this sub-
component will be carried out based on individual sub-basin development plans specifically 
developed and tailored to local conditions, and will aim to revive traditional water bodies (tanks) 
that are either part of or outside the state➢❨ s irrigation systems network.  The sub-component 
will finance civil works, equipment, consultancies, training and incremental operational costs 
associated with modernization of the schemes, and the work will be carried out by WRD, and as 
required  with direct involvements of WUAs.  
 
Sub-component A.3:Participatory irrigation Management 
 
This sub-component aims to integrate participatory irrigation management (PIM) practices into 
the operations of the Water Resource Department as a distinct unit within the Department in order 
to improve Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of modernized and rehabilitated irrigation 
infrastructures.  The sub-component will assist in strengthening and establishing new water users 
associations (WUAs), including operationalizing WUAs to undertake O&M, water distribution, 
and asset rehabilitation works within their command areas.  
 
Sub-component A.4: Converged Service Delivery at Grass-Root Level 
 
For effective service delivery to farmers, all departments involved in the water sector need to 
collaborate. This convergence for service delivery will be promoted through establishing and 
strengthening Single Window Information and Knowledge Centers (SWIKCs), and facilitating 
Community Collaborative Water Management (CCWM) at village level. CCWM will sensitize 
local communities about the water situation and enable them to draw community level action 
plans for sustainable use of water in their villages for all water users. 
 
The overall component will be supported by information and communication technology (ICT) 
Innovative ICT and new media solutions coupled with robust monitoring and evaluation systems 
for real time submission of information related to the project activities will be designed, 
developed and deployed under Component A in addition to leveraging on the existing ICT 
solutions developed during IAMWARM.  In particular, specific ICT interventions to be 
undertaken under this components will be:  (i) Operationalization and enhancement of Enterprise 


Information Managemenget System platform developed under IAMWARMP through retroactive 
financing and (ii) Implementation of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition systems based 
upon sensors based inputs for automation of at least one canal network. 
 
Component B: Agriculture Productivity Enhancement, Diversification, and Value Addition 
 
The interventions of this component are aimed at increasing productivity, promoting 
diversification of agriculture production systems, and improving farmers➢❨  access to markets in 
project sub-basins. The component will adopt climate-resilient approaches that promote 
sustainable use of land and water resources. The component will consist of two sub-components:  
(i) sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production systems; and (ii) 
marketing, value-addition and post-harvest management.  
 
Sub-component B.1: Sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production 
systems 
 
Sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production systems will be achieved 
through a large scale program of awareness creation and on-farm demonstrations on new seeds 
and promising technologies, capacity building and training activities; and by leveraging private 
sector investments in water management and farm mechanization.  Climate risk resilience will be 
built into crop and horticulture production systems by:  (a) promoting cultivation of short 
duration, high yielding, drought-, pest- and disease-tolerant crops/varieties of pulses, maize, 
oilseeds, millets, vegetables and fruits; (b) installation of micro irrigation drip and fertigation 
systems; and (c) promoting water saving agronomic practices like the system of rice 
intensification and the sustainable sugarcane initiative.  For linking production with market 
demand, farmers will be supported and trained to grow those crops and commodities for which 
significant market demand exists, including a shift from paddy to crops with low water 
consumption in which Tamil Nadu is deficient.  ICT-based leveraged activities will be introduced 
like E-velanmai, Farmer Cropping Advisory.  
 
Animal husbandry activities will aim at improving production potentials of livestock through 
adoption of sustainable and climate resilient animal husbandry practices (including fodder 
cultivation) technologies, strengthening of input, extension, and service delivery systems, 
establishing ICT based MIS and infrastructure strengthening and capacity building in breeding, 
disease surveillance and food safety. 
 
Fisheries activities will aim at improving fish productivity mainly in reservoirs, tanks and ponds 
through demonstration of climate resilient modern technology packages such as: short production 
cycle models involving improved fast growing fish varieties; improved reservoir fisheries 
management; introduction of suitable formulated fish feed using locally available ingredients; 
promotion of innovative technologies such as cage fish culture and pen fish farming in an 
environmentally sustainable manner; and facilitation of suitable market linkages for better access 
to markets.   
 
Related to above activities, the project will finance the incremental requirements of contractual 
subject matter experts and support staff, goods and equipment, consultancies, studies, trainings, 
civil works, and incremental operating costs. The Project will also support the GoTN in 
improving existing policies, regulations, and procedures to achieve a climate-resilient and 



sustainable agriculture system by commissioning feasibility studies, preparing detailed action 
plans and implementation guidelines.  
 
Sub-component B.2: Value Addition and Post-Harvest Management 
 
This subcomponent will aim at enhancing farmers' linkages to markets by providing alternative 
marketing channels and improving farm level post-harvest management and value addition.  The 
project will support the setting up of an Agribusiness Promotion Facility, development of farmer 
producer organizations/companies, integration of commercial value chains of agricultural 
commodities, and will facilitate public-private partnerships to enable direct buying arrangements.  
Support will also be provided for modernization and upgrading of selected Regulated Markets 
dealing with project produces and weekly farmers➢❨  markets/rural markets (Varashanthais) on 
cost sharing basis, innovative pilots, institutional strengthening and capacity building of 
Agriculture Marketing and Agribusiness Department. The GoTN is currently in the process of 
amending the Agriculture Produce Market Act of 1987, which would bring in substantial reforms, 
and among others, would create a conducive environment to development of more efficient 
markets with extensive usage of latest ICT technologies. 
 
Component C: Project Management Support 
 
The project will adopt the model of multi-departmental coordination and convergence, and will 
follow the general institutional structure of IAMWARM. The Multi-Disciplinary Project Unit 
(MDPU) established under the IAMWARM will also serve as the management and coordination 
unit for the proposed IAMP, with modifications as needed to be considered during project 
preparation. The MDPU will be responsible for ensuring support to preparation and 
implementation of overall project budget, sub-basin development plans, and implementation 
progress reports by the line departments. The MDPU will provide M&E, procurement and 
fiduciary support as needed to the project implementing agencies. 
 
The activities to be undertaken under the component will also be supported by: i) implementation 
of mobile application and associated back-end software tools for Geo Tagging and remote sensing 
based monitoring of project outcomes and  ii) Implementation of GIS based data acquisition and 
analysis system for studying emission of Methane and other Green House Gases (GHG) in project 
area. Citizen Engagement including Grievance Redressal is to be done by respective department 
as per agreed system.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in 66 sub-basins, including the areas experiencing droughts, floods 
and other climate/natural shocks, particularly in coastal areas. The project activities might  influence 
a diverse set of habitats/ecosystems, including, coastal, plains, hilly, wetlands, rivers and sub-river 
basins as explain below.

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The primary implementing agency has developed some capacity in managing social and 
environmental impacts under IAMWARM Project, which is the first phase to this project    but 
remain weak when it comes to monitoring and reporting of environmental and social manageent 




aspects. Moreover, officials, particularly engineers, who were engaged in the previous project may 
move out due to transfers and this may require additional capacity building measures for the current 
staff. The implementing agency has some familiarity in preparing secondary data based 
environmental atlas for sub-basins, undertaking minor Social and Environmental Assessments, 
preparing Environmental Status Reports and contracting special studies of the river basins in the 
State. However, the second phase project will cover new sub-basins, a fresh full environmental and 
social assessment would be required for which the borrower will prepare and share with the Bank a 
detailed Terms of Reference. A multi-disciplinary project unit (including environmental and social 
experts) is being set up to facilitate the preparation and implementation of this project and based on 
experience of the previous project, will require additional support of external experts to facilitate the 
assessment both during preparation and then during operational phase for implementing the 
mitigation measures.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
Samuel Thangaraj (GTC06)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes Significant physical investments are expected under 
the project and although the nature of these 
investments would be largely rehabilitation of 
existing assets, improper construction could result in 
adverse impacts. An Environmental and Social 
Assessment will be undertaken and an 
Environmental and Social Management Plans would 
be developed for managing risks and maximize 
environmental and social opportunities. These will 
take into account earlier work and experiences of the 
TN WRCP project and consideration of new 
activities proposed in the TN IAMWARM project.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes This is triggered, as a large number of tanks will be 
rehabilitated, including carrier system, which may 
impact natural habitats, particularly wetlands. 
Careful mapping using remote sensing will be 
undertaken as part of conducting the environmental 
assessment.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No No impacts on forests are expected and the project 
will not affect existing forest management practices.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes No pesticides and fertilizers are expected to be 
financed directly by the project; however, there may 
be induced impacts of increased fertilizer and 
pesticide use due to improved agricultural 
intensification and diversification. The project will 
support scaling-up state-wide Integrated Pest 


Management and Integrated Nutrient Management 
efforts and support for safer and organic food 
production and marketing. A pest management plan 
will be prepared as part of the EA.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

TBD No significant adverse impacts on cultural property 
expected, but this issue will be examined during the 
ESA (particularly in relation to proper management 
of any religious and other physical cultural property 
associated with tanks during rehabilitation).

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

TBD A Tribal Mapping of 66 sub-basins to identify areas 
in the sub-basins that are categorized as belonging to 
Schedule 5 areas where GoTN's Tribal Sub-Plans 
and where Forest Rights Act are implemented  will 
be undertaken as part of Social Assessment to 
determine whether or not the OP/BP 4.10 is 
triggered.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes Modernization of irrigation systems and 
rehabilitation and required civil works are likely to 
involve involuntary resettlement. Though efforts will 
be made to avoid this, necessary structures and 
processes to mitigate adverse impacts, if any will be 
put in place in the Social Management Plan.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes The dam safety policy is triggered as some tanks 
may have embankments higher than 15 m, though it 
will be confirmed once tanks are identified. The 
proposed project will draw technical resources from 
the ongoing World Bank funded Dam Rehabilitation 
and ImprovementProject (DRIP) in the State of 
Tamil Nadu, including the participation of the Dam 
Safety Review Panel. During preparation, the 
specific needs for supporting safety of Dams and 
tank systems will be assessed comprehensively and 
interventions needed will be determined. This 
includes the necessary monitoring system.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The project does not fall on any international 
waterways.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No The project is not in any disputed areas.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
29-Dec-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) shall be completed by November 30, 2016, which 


will be for the entire project period. A number of safeguards instruments are expected to be 
prepared. An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, as all 
investments and their locations would not be known by appraisal. An Environment Management 
Plan (EMP) and a Social Management Plan (SMP) will be prepared by appraisal for at least one 
large infrastructure sub-project. In addition, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared that 
will be applicable through the project period. Based on the assessment to trigger the policy on 
Indigenous Peoples, an Indigenous Peoples Framework may be prepared.  Finally, A Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP) will also be prepared.


























































World Bank Document


 

The World Bank  
Guangxi Poverty Reduction Project (P163138) 

 

 Project Information Documents (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2018 | Report No: PIDA155787 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Program Data 

Country Project ID Program Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

China P163138 Guangxi Poverty 
Reduction Program for 
Results 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC 23-Apr-2018 28-Jun-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Program-for-Results Financing PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
CHINA 

Guangxi Poverty Alleciation Office, Guangxi 
Agriculture Department 

 
Proposed Program Development Objective(s) 
 
The program development objective is to enhance the impact and efficiency of the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty 
Reduction Program (CPRP) in the Targeted Counties. 

  
COST & FINANCING 

 

SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 5,129.00 

Total Operation Cost 400.00 

Total Program Cost 400.00 

Total Financing 400.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 400.00 

     World Bank Lending 400.00 
      

 
B. Introduction and Context 

 


Country Context   
China’s success in reducing extreme poverty since the economic reform period is widely recognized as an 
event of global significance. Based on the international poverty line of US$1.90 per day (expressed in 2011 
purchasing power parity), the World Bank estimates that the incidence of poverty in China declined from 
877.8 million in 1981 to 87.4 million in 2012 (or from 88.3 percent to 6.5 percent of the total population).  
These World Bank estimates indicate that about 790 million Chinese escaped poverty during this period, 
representing about 72 percent of global poverty reduction. These estimates of declining poverty have 
been matched by broad-based improvements in nutritional status, educational attainment, longevity and 
other health outcomes, as well as other indicators of well-being. In fact, China was the first country to 
achieve the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving the number of people living in poverty by 
2015, and it did it ahead of schedule. This highlights the country’s leading role in global poverty reduction. 
 
In its Thirteenth Five Year Plan (13th 5YP), Chinese government made an ambitious commitment to 
eliminating rural poverty by 2020, ten years before the WBG’s target of 2030. The Plan includes an explicit 
poverty eradication goal: “All rural residents falling below China’s current poverty line will be able to lift 
themselves out of poverty” and underlines the importance of focusing poverty efforts: “We will identify 
and register those living in poverty throughout the country …(and) will strengthen dynamic statistical 
monitoring of these populations….”. Poverty eradication in China refers not only to help people earn more 
than a minimum income threshold, but also have access to basic goods and services. Consequently, the 
plan includes a list of anti-poverty programs in eight fields: locally viable industries, labor services, finance, 
relocation from inhospitable areas, transportation, ecological conservation, education, health care and 
social security. 
 
The Chinese government has established a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy to achieve the goals 
of the 13th 5YP. Central to this strategy are two institutional innovations which have the potential to 
provide important global lessons to other countries. The first is accurately targeting poverty households, 
villages and counties with the establishment of the National Poverty Registration System (NPRS).  The 
NPRS, established in 2013, is a census of all poor people and villages in China which timely tracks a wide 
range of detailed data about the characteristics of the poor and their main causes of poverty. The first is 
accurately targeting poverty households and villages through the establishment of the National Poverty 
Registration System in 2013.  The NPRS is a census of poor villages and people in China (about 70 million 
at its inception), which timely tracks characteristics of the poor and their main causes of poverty. The 
database is closely integrated into the reporting, prioritization, and accountability lines running upward 
from the village, county, region, and national levels. It provides critical information from the annual 
assessments of which households or villages have exited poverty, are at risk of falling back into poverty, 
or face challenges exiting from poverty. It thus plays a key role in both the identification of the remaining 
poor and the monitoring of programs to eradicate poverty.  
 
Secondly, since 2016, China has introduced the concept of decentralization of poverty reduction efforts 
with the aim to empower county governments to achieve their poverty targets. It consolidates large 
number of earmarked poverty reduction funds into a program-based budgeting system tailored to local 
context. and hold local governments accountable for achieving their poverty reduction targets. It works 
through consolidation of dozens of rural and agricultural earmarked funds which county governments are 
now authorized to use to develop a poverty reduction program tailored to local context.  The designated 
poverty counties have now been put fully in the driver’s seat for achieving poverty reduction goals. 



 

Nevertheless, the program development and implementation remains to be a great challenge for the 
county governments, as little technical guidance and support is provided to them from higher authorities.   
 
The proposed Program for Results operation (PforR) enhances these institutional advancements through 
connecting planned activities more closely to poor households and villages in the NPRS database, and 
aligns fiscal inputs with results by introducing improved planning, budgeting and monitoring systems for 
poverty programs in Guangxi. It also aims to help to improve the monitoring of poverty reduction 
programs in one of the most impoverished regions of the country. The lessons from adopting these 
innovations in Guangxi can serve as learning experience to similar complex settings in the rest of the world 
and will help the WBG in supporting other countries eradicate extreme poverty by 2030. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context  

Guangxi poverty reduction program is a continuing success, which is supported by strong government 
leadership, substantial and increasing funding, and broad assistance from society. In the areas of more 
intense poverty, it has brought about 18 percent annual reduction in rural poverty from 4.68 million poor 
in 2013 to 2.61 million poor in 2016.  However, Guangxi is still one of the 10 provinces in China with rural 
poverty rates above the 7 percent and, given its population size, is one of the six provinces with more than 
3 million rural poor (as of 2016), partly due to low soil fertility in the karst mountain areas and low levels 
of infrastructure and connectivity to other regions in China.   Moreover, as of 2013, the poor in Guangxi 
represented approximately 0.8 percent of the global poor. In this regard, helping the region to achieve its 
poverty eradication goal, would have a noticeable contribution to global poverty eradication. 
 
The Guangxi 5YP aims at achieving poverty eradication not only through households having a regular 
source of income above the minimum poverty threshold, but also in terms of access to housing, basic 
health care, compulsory education, appropriate roads to villages, safe drinking water, access to electricity 
and access to telecommunications. This is akin to a multi-dimensional definition of poverty, and is defined 
in Guangxi as the 8+1 “haves”. Despite of rapid poverty reduction in recent years, projections indicate 
that, to achieve poverty eradication, poverty reduction rates for the period 2016-2020 will have to be 
faster than the ones experienced in 2013-2016. Analysis of data indicates that poverty reduction is closely 
linked to rural net incomes, and that agricultural activity is the main driver of growing rural incomes. 
Moreover, data from the NPRS shows that when asked about the main cause poverty, lack of income was 
the cause mentioned more often by interviewees. Nevertheless, in some counties, other gaps such as lack 
of access to roads or safe drinking water can be the significant cause of poverty. 
 
Mountainous areas of Guangxi are exposed to extreme events, such as heavy rains and floods and to a 
lesser extent longer dry spells on a seasonal basis, as well as climate variability. In addition, Guangxi is also 
classified with high river flood risks and with medium water scarcity risk, especially in karst mountain areas 
where majority of the rural poor are located.  Areas with medium water scarcity could potentially 
transition to more adverse condition with climate-induced drought, affecting crops and/or resulting in 
agriculture competing with drinking water requirements. Mountainous conditions combined with average 
annual rainfall of 1,500-2,000 mm could result in floods and landslides, which could cause damages to 
rural roads.  Guangxi’s present hazard level may increase in the future due to the effects of potential 
climate change. For example, rainfall intensity (which is already above the national average) is expected 
to increase across a range of climate scenarios (Ying et al, 2014 and Wang et al 2015, respectively).  
Knowledge about, and adoption of, climate resilient and climate smart agronomic practices and 



technologies among Guangxi farmers and farmer cooperatives needs to be strengthened to address these 
climate change vulnerability issues in rural areas.   
 

PforR Program Scope  
Guangxi 13th 5-Year Plan (5YP), sets a target of lifting all rural people out of poverty by 2020. Specifically, 
the 5YP sets its main goals to lift: (i) all 4.52 million registered rural poor people out of poverty (end-2015 
figure); (ii) some 5,000 remaining poor villages out of poverty status; and (iii) 54 poverty counties out of 
poverty status. Guangxi Rural Poverty Reduction Program (GRPRP) is summarized in the document: 
“Guangxi Tackling Poverty Thirteen Five Year Plan”, issued in December 2016. It defines the poverty 
reduction strategy for the region to achieve the poverty eradication objectives of the National 13th 5YP. 
 
Within the GRPRP lies the Guangxi Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program (CPRP). The CPRP represents 
a sub-set of the GRPRP in the following ways: (i) it covers 54 designated national and provincial level 
poverty counties; (ii) over 40 earmarked funds from national, regional, municipality and county sources 
are pooled together to constitute the Consolidated Poverty Reduction Fund (CPRF); (iii) expenditures are 
prioritized by the counties in conformance with the 13th 5YP Poverty Reduction Plan priorities; and (iv) 
program activities are targeted at poverty households and villages identified in the national poverty 
registration system. At the heart of the CPRP’s more integrated and locally-driven approach is an annual 
mechanism of bottom-up budgeting in the designated poor counties for meeting their poverty reduction 
targets, coupled with transparent and accountable financing, monitoring and evaluation support from 
higher levels of government. 
 
The proposed PforR will support a sub-set of the activities, funded under CPRF with some exclusions and 
in a circumscribed geographic area. Moreover, the proposed PforR will also support enhanced 
expenditure monitoring efforts that the region will be able to report on budget allocation and execution 
by its major subprograms.  
 
The timeline of the proposed PforR is 2018 – 2021, which are the remaining years of the 13th 5YP, and 
one additional year for verifying results.  
 
The geographic boundary of the proposed PforR is circumscribed to 28 selected counties out of 54 poverty 
designated counties. The subset of 28 counties have high poverty rates (above 11 percent) or large 
poverty headcounts (above 60,000) and is representative of the rural poor in Guangxi. As of 2016, the 
selected 28 counties account for 12.6 million rural population (some 30 percent of rural population); and 
for 1.8 million rural poor, approximately 52.5 percent of the rural poor in the region. Moreover, the 
selected counties are diverse in several dimensions. Most of them are located in mountain areas -usually 
associated with high poverty rates- and a few in the river plains at the center of the region. Among the 28 
counties, there are 20 so called “deep poverty” counties, with poverty incidence rate of about 18 percent 
in 2016. There are also 9 autonomous counties (which sit specific ethnic minorities) and the proportion of 
ethnic minorities among the poor is 67.6 percent, slightly higher than in non-selected counties, 63.9 
percent. The age and gender distribution is like in the rest of the poverty-stricken counties in the region 
(i.e., lower share of adult females and higher share of elderly than the region’s average). 
To ensure the sharper focus on achieving the Government 2020 poverty reduction targets, the Result 
Areas (RAs) of the proposed PforR cover a key subset of the Government program activities, which are to 
the extent feasible, aligned with the government’s own targets. The RAs were selected considering that 
they: (i) make a strong contribution to achieving the government’s 2020 poverty alleviation targets; (ii) 

must be linked to specific measurable results; (iii) provide “value added” in terms of interventions that 
are innovative, scalable or expand upon on-going and planned piloted initiatives; and (iv) incentivize 
behavioral changes.  
 
Results Area 1: Improved Income Generation for Rural Poor. The goal is to increase the direct impact of 
the CPRP on the incomes of the targeted poor households through enabling rural poor to engage in 
agriculture-related economic activities and skills development. The proposed PforR would encourage: (i) 
increased allocation of the CPRF funding towards development of farmers cooperatives and poverty 
reduction leading enterprises; (ii) enhance institutional mechanisms associated with these two programs 
for improved poverty targeting and fund-use efficiency through introducing poverty reduction 
accreditation mechanisms for the enterprises and improved operational and governance standards and 
poverty targeting of farmer cooperatives; and (iii) significantly scale selected vocational skill training 
activities, and improving poverty and gender targeting of these programs.  
 
Results Area 2: Improved Infrastructure for Rural Poor. This results area supports the delivery of basic 
rural infrastructure for the designated poor villages in the targeted poverty counties under the CPRP 
funding arrangements. The goal is to ensure that the registered poor households have access to adequate 
rural drinking water supply and rural roads, which are required to meet Guangxi eight plus one "haves", 
multi-dimensional poverty eradication criteria needed to graduate households from poverty. The types of 
measures to be supported under the PforR include drinking water supply and rural roads. In addition, the 
proposed PforR would strengthen Guangxi infrastructure project management capacity with an aim to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of CPRF expenditures, and thus their poverty reduction impact 
through developing and adopting an IT-based pipeline project management system.   
 
Results Area 3: Cross-cutting Issues for Enhanced Program Implementation.  This Result Area supports 
the improvement of institutional arrangements and capacity through the introduction of poverty 
reduction program budgeting and enhanced monitoring and evaluation systems, with an aim to enable 
the governments to better align budget allocation with the expected output/outcomes and timely 
monitor the progress, efficiency and effectiveness of program implementation. The key activities are 
clustered around two themes: (i) enhancement of the CPRF program-based budgeting systems; and (ii) 
strengthening of the monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of poverty reduction activities. 

 
C. Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  

 
Program Development Objective(s)  

The proposed PforR development objective is to enhance the impact and efficiency of the Guangxi 
Consolidated Poverty Reduction Program in the targeted counties.   

 
D. Environmental and Social Effects 
 

The Environment and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) finds that, in general, the existing legal and 
regulatory framework of environmental, health and safety, and social in China, and in Guangxi are 
consistent with the World Bank’s PforR Policy and Directive. During the PforR preparation, initial 
environmental and social screening was conducted based on the whole 13th 5YP in order to provide 
insights for the definition of the PforR boundary. Activities with potential significant adverse 



environmental and social impacts were excluded from the PforR boundary. These include ecological 
resettlement, major infrastructure construction projects (i.e. class 4 and higher roads), extractive 
activities, disaster relief and preparedness, and returning farmlands to forests. In addition, there are some 
activities subject to limitations, such as rural tourism development, which is limited to guest rooms, 
catering and agri-tourism, without involving physical cultural resources. In addition, the PforR excludes 
any activity subject to EIA Report, especially those located in natural forests; in or near physical cultural 
resources at/above county level; or in or near significant natural habitats. 
 
Some activities supported under the PforR may have potential negative impacts or risks. Pest 
management and livestock waste management are considered the main issues from an environment, 
health and safety perspective. Guangxi is promoting livestock farms to be established and run by farmers’ 
cooperatives under the context of poverty reduction. Livestock waste management is handled by 
individual farmers, who often have inadequate capacity of livestock raising. The ESSA thus recommends 
enhancing the technical capacity of staff in county livestock bureau and enhance technical training and 
support to farmers (PAP action). The current pest management system is aligned with the international 
good practices. The key aspects in the pest management system, such as mandatory system for 
production and sales permits for pesticides, pest disease monitoring and forecasting, and trainings for 
farmers, are satisfactorily performed by relevant institutions. 
 
The assessment of social risks of the activities to be supported under the PforR, concluded that there 
would not be significant social conflicts caused by its activities. However, the PforR would have limited 
social risks in terms of land acquisition or voluntary land donations and land transfers, effective 
participation and consultation, and grievance redress mechanism. The ESSA recommends developing a 
community participation and consultation manual, which will be the PAP action. 
 
OP 7.50 on International Waterways is triggered as the Program activities could potentially involve water 
extraction for rural water supply systems and irrigation from the Pearl River Basin, which is regarded as 
an international waterway, as certain tributaries of the basin originate or flow through Vietnam.  
 
Consultations and information disclosure. Between November 2017 and January 2018, meetings were 
held with representatives from Guangxi region, and three counties government institutions to discuss 
policies and procedures on land acquisition and resettlement, land use right transfer, ethnic minority 
development, among others. Formal public consultation meetings were held during April 14-15, 2018, in 
Nanning and in Du’An county. An electronic copy of the draft ESSA report was uploaded on Guangxi 
government official website and hardcopies were made available together with the consultation 
announcement to key stakeholders prior to formal consultations. 
 

E. Financing 
 

Program Financing 
 

Source 
Amount 

(US$ Million) 
% of Total 

Government 
5.13 93 




IBRD 
0.40 7 

Total 
5.53 100 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture (P160408) 

 
 

  
Dec 21, 2016 Page 1 of 19  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 22-Jan-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC20715 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P160408  Maharashtra Project on 
Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (P160408) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Jun 05, 2017 Aug 24, 2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Ministry of Agriculture, 
Government of Maharashtra 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance climate-resilience and profitability of smallholder farming systems in selected districts of Maharashtra. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower  120.00  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  480.00  

Total Project Cost  600.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. India is one of the fastest growing economies in the world, ranked among the top ten highest GDP countries, and is 

the world’s second most populous country. During the past two decades, India’s GDP grew at an average of 7 

percent annually. Poverty incidence declined on average by 1.5 percentage points per year during 2005–10 and 

improvements in key development indicators have been remarkable. However, following years of impressive 

economic growth and poverty alleviation, India is now at a critical juncture in its paths towards becoming an 

economic powerhouse and is facing important development challenges and structural constraints to a more 

inclusive growth and a more sustainable development. India remains home to 263 million poor people (most of 

which reside in rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day and the economic growth has not generated jobs fast 

enough to absorb labor out of agriculture and low productivity rural jobs. To address these challenges, the 

Government of India (GoI) through its 12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013-17) put forward an ambitious goal for accelerated 

economic growth, poverty reduction, job creation, and environmental management. The plan foresees during this 

period an annual GDP growth of 8.2 percent, a reduction in poverty rate by 10 percentage points, 50 million new 

jobs – and an annual growth in the agriculture and allied rural sectors of 4 percent. 

 
2. Climate change may impede socioeconomic development within India and increasing investment in adaptation 

measures to reduce vulnerability will be essential to maintaining economic growth. India’s rapid growth has 

increased its prominence on the global stage and drawn attention to its climate mitigation and adaptation efforts. 

The country has shown leadership in global efforts to limit climate change and is among the early countries to have 

ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change (in October 2016). Analyses of the country’s historic climate data 

support the extent of the change taking place: an increase in mean annual temperature (0.56°C between 1901 and 

2007), as well as a decrease in seasonal mean rainfall with more frequent extreme rainfall events. Looking ahead, 

temperatures are projected to increase further and at a faster rate than before (by 1.7-2.0
o
C by the 2030s), coupled 

with an overall increase in monsoon rainfall (with an increase in geographic variability) and extreme precipitation 

events (with an increase in rainfall intensity). India shows an increasing trend in its per capita emission of GHGs, 

though current per capita levels are still among the lowest in the world (2.44 tCO2 equivalent per capita in 2012, 

against global average of 5.5 tCO2 equivalent). In absolute terms, India remains one of the largest GHG emitters, 

with its agriculture sector the second largest contributor (around 18 percent of the country’s total GHG emissions).  

 
3. Agriculture sector growth is essential in achieving India’s development goals: the sector currently accounts for 14 

percent of national GDP and is a source of livelihood for more than half of the population. More than two thirds of 

the country’s poor live in rural areas, and their chance of getting out of poverty directly depends on the 

performance of agriculture and allied rural sectors. The success of ongoing massive rural-urban transformation will 

also depend on improved connectivity of rural areas to cities, enhanced agriculture productivity and value chains for 

agricultural products and off-farm job creation in rural areas, which would temper down current massive migrations 

to urban areas. The agriculture sector also has a major potential for reducing GHG emissions and improving 

environmental management through enhanced soil and water conservation and climate-resilient farm management 

practices.  

 
4. Over the past two decades, the agriculture sector has performed below its potential and has not yet met the 

envisaged growth targets. In the 1990s and 2000s, the annual agriculture growth rate was around 3-3.5 percent, and 


dropped even below 2 percent per annum during 2013-15, due to low productivity, growing water and land scarcity, 

rising labor costs, and declining international commodity prices, exacerbated by the late onset of monsoon rainfall 

and increase rainfall intensity. While overall rainfall is projected to increase, its distribution over time and space is 

likely to become much more erratic, thereby leading to increasingly frequent droughts and floods. Unless significant 

efforts to capitalize on the projected increase in rainfall are made to improve water conservation and soil moisture 

management, water scarcity at farm level will remain a key impediment to achieving higher levels of crop and water 

productivity. 

 
5. Going forward, five inter-related and strategic shifts are required to achieve the 4 percent annual growth target 

set by GoI for agriculture and transform the sector into a modern food system: (i) a shift away from food grain 

production targets towards diversification into high-value horticulture and livestock products; (ii) a shift away from 

pure focus on physical productivity (yields) towards resilience and stability of agriculture to deal with the effects of 

climate change and short-term weather anomalies; (iii) a shift away  from a focus on on-farm production towards 

value addition in the post-harvest segments of the food value chains; (iv) a shift away from a calorie focused 

production structure towards nutrition sensitive agriculture, and (v) a shift away from increasing irrigation water 

supply towards improved water use efficiency. The proposed project is designed to directly contribute to this 

structural transformation process by supporting several of those strategic shifts with a focus on building climate 

resilience in the agriculture sector in the State of Maharashtra.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6. The State of Maharashtra is one of the economic growth engines of the country:  it is the top-ranked state in terms 

of contribution to the national GDP (14.4 percent, 2014-15) and has witnessed an average economic growth rate of 

over 8 percent per annum over the last decade. With 9.3 percent of country’s population and 9.4 percent of the 

country’s geographic area, Maharashtra is also the second largest state in India. Structurally, Maharashtra is more 

urbanized and industrialized compared to the rest of the country and economic contributions of the industries and 

of the services sectors are much larger than that of agriculture and allied sectors (which account for only 11 

percent). However, the agriculture sector remains central to Maharashtra’s economic and political landscape, and 

growth in the sector is critical for the state as over 50 percent of its population depends on agriculture.  

 
7. In Maharashtra, agriculture has grown at an annual average of 6.4 percent from 2004-05 to 2011-12, but growth in 

the sector fluctuates heavily and is depending on highly erratic rainfall during any particular year and rainfall 

variability over time. The distribution of rainfall is highly uneven within the state and ranges from over 4,000 mm per 

annum in coastal areas to less than 400 mm in some of the most arid districts. Agriculture remains the highest user 

of freshwater, withdrawing more than 80 per cent of the surface and groundwater (“blue water”) available to the 

state. Since the continuation of the State’s strong economic growth performance would have to be supported by 

higher water availability in all three sectors of the economy, there is a need for Maharashtra to better manage its 

water resources and in particular to enhance the efficiency of the water used for agriculture and focus on increasing 

the availability and use by the agriculture sector of “green water” (rainwater stored in the soil as soil moisture). 

Severe consecutive droughts experienced in large parts of Maharashtra over the last two years have considerably 

affected the state’s agricultural performance and social fabric in rural areas, and have prompted the highest-level 

state authorities to declare “drought-proofing” of agriculture a key development priority for Maharashtra. 


8. Maharashtra’s agriculture is dominated by small and marginal farmers with an average farm size of 1.44 ha. Most 

of the agricultural production is rain-fed, with less than 20 percent of the arable land under irrigation. Farmers’ 

annual production covers two seasons: kharif crops planted at the onset of the monsoon rainfall and ravi crops 

planted at the beginning of the winter season. Due to the broad range of agro climatic zones and soil types 

encountered, the state’s agricultural production is fairly diverse. Crop production is dominated by food grains, i.e. 

cereals (mostly rice, sorghum or jowar, maize) and pulses (chickpea or gram, pidgeon pea or tur). For oilseed crops, 

soybean remains by far the most important commodity. Cotton and sugarcane, whose production is relatively 

water-intensive, are the two cash crops most commonly found in Maharashtra’s farming systems (the State is 

among the largest producers of cotton and sugarcane in the country).  

 
9. The area under cultivation for cereals has declined since 2000, with a considerable drop in the production of 

sorghum (though naturally better adapted to dryer conditions than other cereals) and a shift from food grains 

towards cash crops has been observed, with an increase in the area for cotton and sugarcane. Since 2000, an 

upsurge in the production of high-value horticulture crops has been observed, and today, the State of Maharashtra 

has emerged as one of the country largest producers of fruits (mango, citrus, grapes, pomegranate) and vegetables 

(onion, tomato). Overall, crop productivity has increased over time but remains at relatively low levels (2013-14, 

non-drought year:  sorghum 814 kg/ha; soybean 1,214 kg/ha; cotton 361 kg/ha). Yield gaps for several key crops are 

still significant, reflecting the need for a mix of sector policies and investments to promote research on climate-

adapted varieties, irrigation for a more efficient on-farm use of water, and extension services for the adoption of 

climate-resilient agronomic practices and technologies – i.e. for building climate resilience in Maharashtra’s farming 

systems.   

 
10. In 2008, GoI released the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), and directed the States to develop 

State Action Plans on Climate Change guided by and consistent with the structure and strategies of the NAPCC. The 

GoM took a pioneering step towards formulating the Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on Climate Change 

(MSAAPCC) by commissioning a comprehensive vulnerability assessment study which included the task of 

generating model-based climate projections specific to the State’s geography. The MSAAPCC seeks to address the 

urgent need to integrate climate change concerns into the State’s overall development strategy, thus assisting in 

building long term climate resilience and enabling adaptation to the likelihood of risks arising from climate change. 

The MSAAPCC climate modelling results for 2030, 2050 and 2070, show that temperature and rainfall are projected 

to increase across the State of Maharashtra, with important regional variations – resulting, on balance, in potentially 

significant adverse impacts on agriculture performance.  

 
11. The annual mean temperature in Maharashtra is projected to increase by around 1.3-1.5

o
C by the 2030s; the 

projected increase in monsoon rainfall by the 2030s ranges from 13-30% across the state. These analytical findings 

from the MSAAPCC are consistent with the findings of the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 

on Climate Change (IPCC). The effects of these longer term climate trends on sectors like agriculture or water, 

effectively signaling a shift in climatic conditions, will be further aggravated by the projected increase in the 

frequency of extreme climate events (droughts, hailstorms, floods, delays in the onset of monsoons, higher rainfall 

intensity) already experienced in Maharashtra over recent past, as illustrated by the 3 severe droughts that hit the 

state over the past 5 years.  

 


12. The GoI has designed a number of policy initiatives and programs aligned with the recommendations from the 

NAPCC program and the state-level action plans, including the National Initiative on Climate Resilient Agriculture 

(NICRA) to promote the development of climate-resilient villages; the Pardhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 

(PMKSY) Program to promote efficient irrigation practices and improve water use efficiency; the Jalyukt Shivar 

Abhiyan (JSA) Program on watershed and drought management; the Integrated Watershed Management Program 

(IWMP) on natural resources conservation; as well as India’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) as 

presented to the COP21 in Paris to address the adverse effects of climate change. Against this background, the GoM 

is committed to further support and implement those policies in Maharashtra and sees the proposed project as an 

opportunity to contribute to the implementation of policies in support of the climate agenda. 

 
13. Higher level authorities in the state of Maharashtra have recently embraced a new paradigm for the agricultural 

sector which now needs to be mainstreamed across institutions and stakeholders. It is built around the recognition 

and understanding of climate change and climate variability as the “new normal”; this in turn, requires a structural 

shift in the approach to sustainable agriculture growth based on longer-term adaptive interventions (reforms, 

investments, capacity development) to build climate-resilience in agriculture – in addition to focusing primarily on 

shorter-term emergency responses to recurring natural disasters. The Bank is very well placed to provide value-

added to the GoM in establishing this new paradigm through its experience with climate-resilient agriculture 

elsewhere, its capacity to work multi-sectorally, and to apply cutting-edge knowledge at scale in support of changes 

in policies and strategies to promote climate adaptation and mitigation, and generate climate co-benefits.  

 
Relationship to CPF 
 
14. The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY2013–17 to 

support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in India. In line with the pillar for Transformation, the project 

promotes inclusive rural growth, development and dissemination of new agricultural technologies, climate-resilient 

agriculture, enhanced market linkages for small and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource 

management (Outcome 2.4). Further, the proposed project will have a positive impact in terms of: (i) environmental 

protection by enhancing the management of soil and water resources, (ii) reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 

disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and (iii) promoting diversification into high value crops (Outcomes 

2.5 and 2.6). The project will also contribute to the Inclusion pillar of the CPS by enhancing the livelihoods of small 

and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market access (Outcome 3.6), and by improving local 

communities’ ability to manage droughts and floods through enhanced design and restoration of irrigation 

infrastructure with better flood protection features (Outcome 3.8).  

 
15. The project is fully aligned with the Bank’s Climate Change Action Plan (CCAP) which explicitly highlights climate-

resilient agriculture and water management as key priorities for climate adaptation in the South Asia Region (SAR). 

CCAP also advocates that transformative action on climate change requires partnerships with client countries to 

mobilize additional capital for mitigation and adaptation action, which the project proposes to achieve with 

potential co-financing from the GoM as well as from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) through IFC’s 2030 Water 

Resources Program. The project will directly contribute to WBG’s commitment to increase the climate-related share 

of its portfolio from 21 to 28 percent by 2020 in response to client demand.  

  

16. The project is based on a multi sector approach and will require close collaboration across the Bank’s Global 

Practices and Units (Agriculture, Water, Trade & Competitiveness, Climate Change, and Disaster Risk Management) 

in the design and throughout implementation. Close collaboration during planning and implementation will be 

sought with thematically related on-going/pipeline projects and initiatives (e.g. Maharashtra Agricultural 

Competitiveness Project - MACP, P120836; India Climate Change Mitigation Action Support, P162119; National 

Groundwater Management Improvement Program, P158119). Collaboration with IFC is secured through the 

inclusion on the project team of technical staff from IFC’s 2030 Water Resources Group (2030WRG) and efforts to 

develop co-financing arrangements with possible funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF).  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
17. The PDO is to enhance climate-resilience and profitability of smallholder farming systems in selected districts of 

Maharashtra. 

 
18. Direct project beneficiaries will be small farmers (households with 1.0 to 2.0 ha of farm land) and marginal farmers 

(less than 1.0 ha), who will gain from knowledge and technology transfer, and access to assets to enhance climate 

resilience on their farms, as well as increased revenue from crop diversification and participation in emerging value 

chains. Farmer producer companies (FPCs) and small and medium agro-entrepreneurs (SMEs) will also benefit from 

the project through climate-resilient investments in value chain development, support with the promotion of 

backward and forward linkages, and access to business development and incubation services. The project will also 

directly benefit local institutions and agencies (e.g. agricultural research and extension, technical advisory services) 

through capacity development on climate resilience. State Agriculture Universities (SAU), various line departments, 

government agencies and other institutions at district and sub district level will also benefit through a strategic 

partnership with the project towards mainstreaming climate resilience in agriculture.  

   
B. Key Results 
 

19. The following Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are proposed for measuring the core outcomes of the project:  

a. KPI #1 - Resilience: Farmers adopting climate-resilient agricultural technologies [Corporate Results 

Indicator] 

b. KPI #2 - Resilience: Area provided with micro irrigation systems [Corporate Results Indicator]  

a. KPI #3 - Resilience: Average on-farm soil organic carbon content 

b. KPI #4 - Profitability: Average farm income  

c. KPI #5 - Direct beneficiaries: Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (by gender) [Corporate 

Results Indicator] 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
20. Project area. The proposed project will be implemented in the 15 districts of the Mrathwada and Vidarbha regions 

that have been most affected by the recurrent monsoon failures of recent years. These districts account for a total 

population of 30.2 million people and a project area of around 3.5 million ha. Out of a total of 18,000 villages in the 

districts selected, the project will cover 5,000 villages characterized by a high climate-vulnerability index and low 

HDI; this includes about 1,000 villages located in the Purna river basin tract and showing very high levels of soil 

salinity and sodicity. Managed spill-over effects are expected for a range project activities and outputs to villages not 

covered by the project. Most of the project area is located in Maharashtra’s semi-arid agro climatic zones. The vast 

majority of rural households in the project districts are small and marginal farmers whose livelihood depends for 

more than 90 percent on rainfed agriculture.  

 
21. Cropping patterns in the selected districts are dominated by cereals (mostly sorghum and millet), pulses and 

oilseeds (soybean). While cotton remains the main cash crop, more and more farmers are growing fruit trees to 

secure their farm income. Unlike in some other parts of Maharashtra where groundwater shortage has become an 

acute problem, in the project area only 55 percent of the total groundwater potential has been harnessed. However, 

poor management of surface water and lack of in situ storage in the project area have aggravated the impact on 

agriculture from the severe consecutive droughts that have hit Maharashtra in the past couple of years. 

 
22. Project rationale and alternatives considered. The proposed project results from a clear understanding at the 

highest level of authority in the state that Maharashtra needs a comprehensive, long-term and systematic approach 

to managing and coping with climate change and variability. In the past, emergency responses to increasingly 

frequent climate events have yielded only limited results: such short-term approach did not significantly boost 

agriculture sector performance, prevent further deterioration of the socio-economic fabric in rural areas (exodus, 

farmer suicides), or lead to an increase in farmer income and prosperity. Thus, given the climate projections that 

indicate severe impact on the agriculture and water sectors in Maharashtra under status quo, the new paradigm to 

addressing climate adaptation and mitigation in the agriculture and food system is essential.  

 
23. In addition to the short-term disaster management approach, a policy-based project approach was considered to 

address the impact of climate change on agriculture. Such approach would aim at reforming policies, including those 

that encourage the rapid expansion of water-intensive crops resulting in the depletion of groundwater resources. 

This approach was not pursued, since the selected project area presents distinct agro-hydrological features (e.g. no 

rice is grown in the project area and the sugarcane grown in the selected districts represents less than 3 percent of 

the state-level production). Importantly, the key policies impacting the selected project area relate to markets, and 

on these, Maharashtra has been among the most progressive states in terms of implementing policy reform. The 

remaining policies are beyond the State mandate, controlled by the central government, and these mostly relate to 

the distorting minimum support prices for selected commodities, which by and large are not growth in the project.  

 
24. Finally, a watershed-based approach was considered for the project, with a stronger focus on natural resources 

management. This approach was eventually discarded since it would not sufficiently focus on farm-level adaptation 

and mitigation issues nor would it provide the support for value chain development, a key part of the 

comprehensive approach needed to provide the market outlets and input supplies required to incentivize farmers to 

adopt resilient crops and agronomic practices. 

 
25. In line with GoM request, the proposed project, as represented in the graph below, is built around a comprehensive, 

multi sector approach that focuses specifically on building resilience in agriculture through the scaling up of tested 

technologies and practices, while generating the following interdependent triple win solutions:  

a. enhanced water security at farm level - through the adoption of technologies for a more efficient use of 

water for agriculture, and the increase in water storage capacity (surface and sub-surface) and 

improvement in water distribution structures to address on-farm water availability and reduce the risks 

associated with intra- and inter seasonal climate variability;  

b. improved soil health - through the adoption of good agricultural practices to improve soil fertility, soil 

nutrient management, and promote soil carbon sequestration; and  

c. increased farm productivity and crop diversification - through the adoption of climate-resilient seed 

varieties (short maturity, drought and heat resistant, salt tolerant) and market-oriented crops with a 

clear potential for income security derived from the integration of farmers in corresponding value-

chains.  

 

Strategic Overview, Thematic Linkages and expected Achievements of the PoCRA  

 

 
26. Sustainable pathways to resilience. Enhancing climate-resilience in agriculture involves the integration of 

adaptation, mitigation, and other practices in agriculture that increase the capacity of the farmer and his/her 

production system to respond to various climate-related disturbances by resisting or tolerating the damage and 

recovering quickly. To ensure the sustainability of the comprehensive on-farm and off-farm interventions required 

to build resilience in agriculture, there is a need to strengthen institutions, in particular at the local level, and 

improve their capacity to plan for adaptation to evolving climatic conditions and induce a change in local practices.  

 
27. In addition, the successful adoption of climate-resilient farming practices will largely depend on the farmer’s 

perception of income gains from the new technologies, as profitability remains the most important incentive for 

change at farm level. To that effect, crop diversification, access to knowledge and farm assets needs to be 


accompanied by more market opportunities, which can be achieved through improved participation of organized 

smallholders in the corresponding value chains and the mobilization of private sector (e.g. agri business SMEs).  

 
28. Finally, generating cutting-edge knowledge on climate change and its impact on key sectors such as agriculture and 

water is key to providing strong analytical underpinnings for policies on climate adaptation and mitigation – which 

still need better implementation in Maharashtra (and the rest of the country), despite the state being a frontrunner 

in India on the reform agenda for climate change.      

 
29. Leveraging financial resources. Implementing climate-resilient practices at a scale to cover the targeted 5,000 

villages in a saturation mode with watershed treatment and on-farm technologies requires an estimated total costs 

of well over US$2 billion. The tentative budget for the proposed project is US$600 million, with US$480 million from 

IBRD and US$120 million from GoI/GoM. This represents an average budget envelope of US$20,000 per village and 

year. A contribution from project beneficiaries towards technologies adopted and assets acquired from the project 

will be subsequently factored in, on the basis of the cost-sharing norms applied in other GoM programs and 

projects. Therefore, a major task during project preparation will consist in strategically prioritizing interventions 

planned in each cluster of around 10 villages, selecting results-based investments to be financed, and phasing in 

activities to be implemented in a given cluster.  

 
30. Against this background, the GoM is seeking to leverage its own resources and the IBRD funding with 

complementary funding from the Green Climate Fund (GCF). IFC’s 2030 Water Resources Group is currently 

supporting the GoM’s efforts to access GCF grant funding in the range of US$250 million to scale up climate 

adaptation in Maharashtra rain-fed agriculture. During project preparation, Bank and 2030WRG staff will work as 

one project team and explore with counterparts possible co-financing arrangements between the IBRD funding and 

the GCF grant.  

  
31. Project overview. The proposed project seeks to introduce transformational changes in the agriculture sector by 

scaling-up proven technologies and good agricultural practices that contribute to building climate resilience and 

enhancing farm income. The project will promote the transfer of technologies for climate adaptation and mitigation 

at farm level and will support targeted interventions and limited physical investments in the catchment area to 

promote the use of surface water over groundwater. To enhance farmer income, the project will support activities 

aimed at linking organized smallholders with agri-food SMEs and accessing new market opportunities enhancing 

their participation in commodity value chains.  

  
32. Finally, for the sustainability of the comprehensive approach proposed to build resilience in agriculture, the project 

will enhance the capacity of institutions and agencies at various levels to mainstream resilience (in particular in 
agricultural services for smallholders), develop strategic partnerships with national and international entities, and 
help generate evidence-based knowledge to advance the policy agenda on climate change and vulnerability.  To 
achieve the PDO and KPI targets, the project is designed around the four components described below.    

 
Component A: Promoting Climate-resilient Agricultural Systems (US$ XXX million) 
  

33. The objective of this component is to build climate-resilience in agricultural production systems through a series of 
activities at farm level, complemented by interventions in catchment areas. Mini watershed plans will be developed 
early to provide a road map for investment priorities and the implementation of related activities. This component 



will focus on: (i) scaling-up the adoption by farmers of climate-resilient agricultural practices aimed at improving soil 
health and water-use efficiency; and (ii) catchment area treatment to promote the use of “green water” for 
agriculture over “blue water”, and improve the availability of water at farm level. This component contributes 
directly to the PDO by promoting the transfer of climate resilient technologies at farm level (KPI #1), supporting the 
development of micro-irrigation systems (KPI #2) and encouraging farmers to adopt practices that enhance soil 
health (KPI #3). 

  
34. Participatory development of mini watershed plans. In line with the Maharashtra Groundwater Development and 

Management Act (2009, effective from 2013) which promotes the watershed as participatory planning unit, this 
component will finance the development of some 500 mini watershed plans, each covering a cluster of 8 to 12 
villages and an area of around 5,000 ha. Mini watershed plans are comprehensive multi-year activity and local 
investment tools for planning and monitoring. They include a comprehensive resource mapping, a rapid appraisal of 
stakeholders taking into account gender specificities, and participatory water budgeting to inform on possible 
investments in irrigation and drainage, and water resources management. Those plans will serve as a road map for 
the implementation of subsequent activities and investments under the proposed project. 

  
35. Technology transfer and climate-resilient agriculture practices for a sustainable soil and water management.  To 

enhance increase water productivity and achieve water security at farm level, the component will scale-up the 
adoption of technologies and practices aimed at maximizing the use of surface water for agriculture, at managing 
groundwater resources in a sustainable manner, and at getting “more crop per drop”. To that effect, the component 
will finance the adoption of in-situ soil moisture conservation practices, and the expansion of micro irrigation 
systems (primarily drip and sprinkler irrigation), including water supply structures and drainage facilities. The 
component will also help improve on-farm water availability through selected investments at catchment level (as 
prioritized in the mini watershed plan) to increase surface and sub-surface water storage capacity. To that effect and 
in close coordination with the Chief Minister’s Program on watershed and drought management (Jalyukt Shivar 
Abhiyan), the project will finance drainage line treatment, the improvement of water courses, the construction of 
new and desilting of existing water harvesting structures (e.g. farm and community ponds), and the construction of 
groundwater recharge structures. Agronomic practices promoted under this component in support of improved soil 
moisture management will include, among other, contour bunding, broad-bed furrow and conservation furrow 
cultivation. The component will also support efforts towards a more rigorous monitoring of the quality of the water 
available for agriculture. 

 
36. To improve on-farm soil fertility and micronutrient management, the component will scale-up the adoption of 

climate-resilient agricultural practices aimed at: (i) increasing the soil organic matter content, and (ii) sustaining a 
viable agriculture on the naturally saline and sodic farm soils prevailing in parts of the project area. Conventional 
methods to address soil salinity and soil sodicity (i.e. land reclamation with widespread application of gypsum or 
lime) will be reviewed for their economic sustainability and financial viability in the local context, and used only 
where significant and long term net benefits can be expected. Good agricultural practices aimed at improving soil 
health have been successfully tested in other programs in Maharashtra and beyond (e.g. NICRA) and include 
biomass mulching, residue recycling, manure management, conservation tillage, in-situ moisture conservation and 
others.  

  
Component B: Climate-resilient Post-harvest Management and Value Chain Promotion (US$ XXX million) 
 

37. The objective of this component is to enhance climate resilience beyond farm gate and provide end-to-end solutions 
in selected commodity value chains. To ensure successful crop diversification, the component will help: (i) develop 

smallholder-inclusive value chains for climate-resilient commodities, and (ii) overcome constraints in the seed supply 
chain. In line with GoM priorities, this component will focus on Farmer Producer Companies (FPCs) as major drivers 
of change in the agri-food system. An increase in farm income remains the key driver of change and a pre-
requirement for the adoption of the climate-resilient technologies and good agricultural practices promoted under 
Component A. Thus, this component will directly contribute to the PDO by creating opportunities for increasing the 
revenue of small and marginal farmers (KP #4) through crop diversification and their participation in selected value 
chains.  

   
38. Promoting Farmer Producer Companies. This component will build on the outcomes of other GoM programs and 

projects that have focused on FPCs as agent of change (e.g. MACP). A rapid appraisal exercise, with mapping, 
profiling and capacity needs assessment of the 420 FPCs in the project area (most of them in early development 
stage), will provide the basis for a series of activities tailored to the growth potential of existing FPCs. The 
component will also support the development of farmer-group based organizations into entrepreneurial, market-
oriented, financially sustainable companies with the capacity to perform selected value-adding activities and deliver 
a range of services (e.g climate-related technical advisory services, training on climate adaptation and mitigation 
practices in post-harvest management). The component will support viable mechanisms to further consolidate and 
set up new business linkages for FPCs with private sector (e.g. exporters, seed companies, farm machinery, agro-
input suppliers, and financial institutions). For the professionalization of FPCs, the project will explore a 
collaboration with IFC’s Agribusiness Leadership Program and/or Business Edge Program. Eligible FPCs will also 
benefit from participating in the incubation program of the proposed Climate Innovation Center (see Component C). 

  
39. Strengthening emerging value-chains for climate-resilient commodities. The selection of agricultural value chains for 

end-to-end solutions (from agricultural research to consumer markets) will be finalized by the PMU during project 
preparation. Pulses and oilseeds are emerging as potential priority commodities for end-to-end solutions. In 
addition, the component will support value-chains emerging in the project area following farmers’ production 
diversification to include higher-value commodities, in particular fruit trees (more climate-resilient than annual 
crops given their deeper root system). The component will also support viable investments in product aggregation, 
handling, transformation and marketing (e.g. collection centers, grading and packaging units, cold storage facilities, 
ICT-based market information systems). Priority will be given to investments that promote the use of green 
technologies (including solar energy). Value-chain financing and specifically access to finance and financial services 
for value chain actors will be explored under this component 

  
40. Improving the performance of the supply chain for climate-resilient seeds. The adequate supply of seeds with short 

duration, drought-, salinity- or heat-tolerant features, is a key priority for the GoM’s in its strategy to build climate 
resilience in the agriculture sector. The seed industry in MH is largely segmented, with private seed companies 
mainly focusing on the high value, low volume seeds (e.g. cotton, sugar cane, GM and hybrid varieties), while public 
sector seed corporations dominate the market for low value, high volume seeds (e.g. cereals, pulses and oilseeds). 
The component will address the need for increasing the availability of seeds, given farmers’ evolving demand 
resulting from the recommendations of the district-level contingency plans triggered by climate events (e.g. delays 
in onset of monsoon rains call for different crop mix). To address the shortage of breeder seeds, the component will 
assess the SAU’s breeder seeds programs and support solutions aimed at enhancing their performance (including 
developing linkages with FPCs for seed multiplication). This component will also seek to support key actors in the 
seed supply chain such as the Maharashtra State Seed Corporation who plays a unique role in the production and 
distribution of climate-resilient certified seeds for small and marginal farmers (e.g. pulses and oilseeds). It will also 
finance the development of a limited number of seed processing and storing hubs in strategic locations of the 
project area. 

 
Component C: Institutional Development, Knowledge and Policies for a Climate-resilient Agriculture (US$ XXX million) 
 

41. The objective of this component is to ensure sustainability in the approach proposed for building climate resilience 
through a longer term adaptive management of agriculture, soil and water resources, by: (i) strengthening the 
capacity of existing institutions to design and deliver agro-technical and climate advisory services, (ii) establishing a 
Climate Innovation Center, and (iii) promoting an evidence-based policy dialogue on climate resilience. Successful 
implementation of the activities in this component will contribute to achieving the PDO by increasing the outreach 
of institutions and agencies promoting climate-resilient agriculture in the project area (KPI #5) and generating 
spillover effects to farming communities from other villages in the project area not covered by project activities.   

 
42. Sustainability and institutional capacity development. To ensure the sustainability of the comprehensive approach 

on climate-resilient agriculture proposed in this project, this component will support the development and 
implementation of a capacity development program for district and local level stakeholders. This component will 
mainstream climate-resilience in the strategic objectives of institutions and agencies involved in the delivery of 
services to small and marginal farmers. At district level, the project will work closely with the Superintendent District 
Agricultural Offices (SDAOs) and build their capacity to coordinate and monitor the implementation of the climate-
resilience agenda on the ground. At state level, the project will develop partnerships with the SAUs and support 
existing programs for the development and field-testing of emerging agricultural technologies and practices for 
climate-adaption of dryland farming systems. The component will also promote knowledge and learning exchanges 
on climate-resilience with national/international entities such as ICRISAT, CRIDA, the Indian Institute of Science, the 
Indian Meteorological Department, the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR), the 
Australian Water Partnership (AWP), and the Carbon Management and Sequestration Center (CMASC, Ohio State 
University).  

 
43. Maharashtra Climate Innovation Center (CIC). This component will finance the planning, launch and start-up phase 

for a CIC until it operates in a self-sustained manner. The CIC will support local private sector capacity – with focus 
on entrepreneurs and SMEs – to commercialize and deploy emerging technologies and business models in growing 
climate sectors (e.g. climate-resilient agriculture, water, energy) to provide local solutions to climate change. The CIC 
will offer services tailored to local needs and conditions among a suite of tools which includes: access to latest 
technology information and market intelligence, fee-based business advisory and other incubation/coaching support 
services, and tailored proof-of-concept grant and seed investment financing to prove and scale early-stage firms and 
concepts. The CIC will draw on local and international expertise to support the GoM with the review and formulation 
of policies and strategies relevant to climate change and climate resilient, in particular as linked to the agri-food 
sectors. During project preparation, the PMU will commission a feasibility study for the CIC; it will be followed up 
during early project implementation with the development of a detailed CIC business and financial plan to be 
submitted for approval to the relevant authorities.  The CIC will be established with technical guidance from the 
Bank’s Climate Technology Program. 

  
44. Knowledge and policies. This component will finance a range of analytical studies aimed at updating and 

disseminating existing knowledge on a range of issues related to climate resilience and agriculture. Such studies will 
provide the analytical underpinnings to improve the policy and strategy framework required to further enhance 
resilience in the agri-food system in Maharashtra (and beyond). This component will support efforts towards a multi 
stakeholder dialogue on policies promoting climate resilience in agriculture, as well as direct payments to farmers 
for environmental services (e.g. soil carbon sequestration, groundwater conservation). This component will also  
look at reliable ways to quantify potential mitigation benefits from activities promoted by the project and aim at 



providing a pathway to carbon financing. The component will also finance the development of a state-of-the art 
climate and agro-hydrological model that supports policy-makers Maharashtra by: (i) making projections on the level 
of sustainable withdrawal of surface and groundwater in a given watershed under various climate and land use 
scenarios, (ii) generating suitability maps for Managed Aquifer Recharge (MAR), and (iii) assessing the magnitude of 
MAR in the project area.  

  
Component D: Project Management (US$ XXX million) 
 

45. This component will primarily finance the project’s incremental operating costs.  A PMU has been set up by the 
Department of Agriculture (GoM) and tasked with the overall management of the project, while ensuring smooth 
coordination of activity implementation by various agencies and strategic partners. Given the transformative nature 
of the project, institutional coordination within and across the relevant sectors is emerging as a critical task in 
developing an effective project implementation mechanism. The PMU will be responsible for compiling an annual 
Activity Plan and Work Program and develop the corresponding budget proposal to be submitted for approval to the 
Project Steering Committee.  

 
46. The PMU will ensure that all project activities are implemented in line with the provisions in the official project 

documents; in particular, the PMU will be in charge of financial management, project procurement, and safeguards 
compliance. The component will support all activities related to project communication, public awareness and 
outreach, including the development of a comprehensive project web site. It will finance the services of specialized 
consultant firms to develop and implement a comprehensive project impact evaluation (including all surveys). 
Further, the project will promote the intensive use of ICT across components; to that effect, this component will 
finance both ICT goods and specialized consultant services. The project’s M&E system will be ICT-based, enabling the 
PIU to access project information and data from the field in real-time. ICT will also be used to facilitate the feedback 
from project beneficiaries on project activities planned/under implementation (citizen engagement), and will be 
mainstreamed in the project’s grievance and redress mechanism. 
 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Maharashtra is one of India’s most prosperous states, with a population of 114 million. Yet, it has some of India’s poorest 

people, four of its 36 districts are among India’s 106 most backward. Agriculture and industry form the mainstay of the 
state's economy. Most of the cultivable land is still rain-fed, relying heavily on the southwest monsoon rains. Districts in 
eastern Maharashtra on the Deccan plateau are particularly prone to drought. The net irrigated area is only 30.77 million 
Ha or about 16% of cultivable land. In Maharashtra, main crops include rice (although not grown in the project area), 
jowar, bajra, pulses, vegetables and onions. The main cash crops include cotton, sugarcane (though the project area 
accounts for only 3 percent of the state sugar cane production), turmeric, and several oilseeds. Amravati and Yavatmal, 
respectively in Vidharba region are the largest orange and cotton growing districts. 
The Project will be implemented in two main regions:  Vidharbha  and Marathwada comprising some 5,000 villages - 

selected for their high climate vulnerability index and low HDI; in addition, about 1,000 of these villages are characterized 
by high levels of soil salinity and sodicity. The project area is characterized by a substantial spatial and temporal rainfall 
variation and scarcity of water resources . These are increasingly exacerbated by frequent droughts associated with 
climate change and high human pressure on natural resources.  


The proposed project is premised on the fact that climate changes are quite inevitable and that it affects all the 
households  much more on the livelihoods of the poor and vulnerable sections. Further, it is well recognized that the 
households/ communities in the rain fed agriculture are quite diverse and heterogeneous with several sub groups 
identifiable based on several factors – resource endowment, gender, ethnicity ( scheduled tribes), castes (scheduled 
castes), religious minorities and geographical setting ( forests, hills, coastal areas). Each of these subgroups gets affected 
differently and has differential capacity for participation. Lastly, to ensure a village/ community spread resilience, group / 
collective action would be essential which demands substantial outreach efforts. Given this scenario, following issues 
emerge as significant: local participation, institutional linkages and communication outreach. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
GoM has established a PMU, with a full time environmental specialist, to guide and coordinate preparation of 

environmental and social management framework (ESMF) of the project. A consultant firm has also been brought on 
board by GoM to prepare the ESMF together with the project implementation plan (PIP). During project implementation, 
there will also be environment specialists at the District PMUs in Akola and Aurangabad. GoM has experience with 
implementing World Bank funded projects, in similar sectors, such as Maharashtra Agriculture Competitiveness Project 
and Maharashtra Water Sector Improvement Project. For these projects, GoM is already implementing various tools for 
managing environmental and social issues, such as ESMF. Therefore, there is good borrower orientation and sensitivity to 
implement Bank’s safeguards. 
The project, through the safeguards instruments, will also put in place a capacity building program for staff, and project 

beneficiaries to ensure successful implementation of ESMF and IPM plan, and compliance with the Bank’s safeguards 
policies. A full understanding of the capacity-building need is expected once the draft ESMF is prepared.  
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Suryanarayana Satish, Anupam Joshi, Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

OP 4.01 is triggered because the project involves a 
series of interventions for increasing productivity, 
enhancing resilience, and agriculture value chain 
development.  Investments to be supported under the 
project will not lead to any major irreversible impacts, 
however, if not designed effectively,  may generate 
impacts such as soil degradation, water pollution, 
biodiversity conservation, labor safety issues. (these 
are mostly temporary by nature and site specific).  
 
The project will also have positive impacts on the 
environment and natural resource base of the project 
area such as drought-proofing rain-fed agriculture in 
the semi-arid regions, prevention of soil degradation, 

increase of soil moisture and in biomass and organic 
matter of soil, decrease of run-off and soil losses, 
increased climate resilience and annual water 
availability. All mitigation measures would be carefully 
designed in order to enhance the positive impacts, and 
ensure sustainability of investments. 
 
Overall, the project related impacts are mostly 
positive, hence it has been classified as category B. At 
this very juncture, the scope and location of the 
interventions are not known. Hence, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is being 
prepared which outlines the process for future 
subprojects to ensure that they are environmentally 
and socially sound, sustainable, and in line with GoM 
and World Bank operational safeguards policies. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Project financed investments are not expected to 
intervene in any critical natural habitats. The project 
areas contain some essential ecosystems with rich 
biodiversity, and a number of wildlife sanctuaries such 
as Jayakwadi Bird Sanctuary, in Marathwada, and 
Bhamragarh, Bor, Charpala, Chikhaladara Wildlife 
Sanctuary. There are also a number of tiger habitats 
such as Tadoba Andhari Tiger Project, Melghat Tiger 
Project, Pench Tiger Reserve located in Vidarbha 
region. 
 
As details of the exact sites of the proposed 
investments are yet to be known, and investments 
involving civil works may be located within the 
proximity of these areas OP 4.04 is triggered. The 
ESMF would include all adequate measures for 
avoidance, mitigation of impacts and preventive 
measures for negative effects on natural habitats.  
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

Project financed activities will not support 
afforestation, reforestation or pasture improvement 
activities. The project will not encroach on forest land 
or change the management of forest resources. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered because investments targeted 
at increasing agricultural productivity and climate-
resilient agronomic practices may encourage the use 
of pesticides. There is therefore a need to promote the 
use of integrated pest management techniques, 
including the safe use, storage and disposal of agro-
chemicals. The ESMF will aim at providing as much 



information as possible on biological approaches to 
pest management. The project will prepare and 
promote an Integrated Pest Management Plan. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

The project is not expected to have an impact on 
physical cultural resources, as it will be implemented 
in areas where agriculture is already practiced. 
However, the project area comprises of Aurangabad 
district, which contains many historical structures and 
UNESCO world heritage sites.  
The project will ascertain through preparation, if there 
is evidence that the project location sites would 
contain features of archeological, historical or cultural 
significance.  Following which, the ESMF would include 
provisions of chance finds to be followed by 
implementing partners, on the proper management of 
physical cultural resources if discovered during project 
implementation.  
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

There are 2.7 million Scheduled Tribe population in 
the 15 project districts which account to about 8% of 
the total population. Further, 27 Tehsils spread across 
11 districts are covered under the Fifth Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution which provides a variety of 
safeguards for the tribals. Given this, the project 
triggers the Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) 4.10 on 
Indigenous Peoples.  However, the next step on 
deploying the instrument- Tribal Peoples Plan (TPP) or 
Tribal Peoples Planning Framework (TPPF)— needs to 
be decided. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 TBD 

Once the project interventions are firmed up and the 
Social Assessment Study is completed, a decision can 
be made on whether lands are required and the 
methods of scuring thereof. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

OP 4.37 is not triggered as the project investments will 
not support construction, or rely on performance of an 
existing dam >15m height. The project will not  
support rehabilitation of existing or building any new 
irrigation schemes originating from existing dams in 
the State 
 
The project may include construction of small check 
dams. The potential adverse safety and security 
impacts will be addressed in the ESMF which will 
include adequate measures to ensure that the design, 
construction and the maintenance of the small dams 
will be done by qualified engineers.  

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
OP 7.5 is not triggered as no international waterways 
are involved. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No NA 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
May 05, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Project has initiated efforts towards the conducting a comprehensive Environmental and Social Assessment. This is 

expected to result in: (i) Integrated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Tribal People Plan/ 
Framework, as appropriate; (iii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), if need be; (iv) IPM/IPNM plans.  A Terms of 
reference (TOR) for the conduction of assessments and preparation of the ESMF  has been prepared by the PMU.  
 
The ESMF will provide essential baseline data, confirm policies that are triggered, assess likely impacts of the project 

interventions. The ESMF will also propose mitigation measures for any adverse impacts that may be envisaged through 
the design and construction phases of various interventions. Recommendations for strengthening institutional capacity, 
and estimate the budget required for the implementation will also be included. While the assessments will be 
participatory with due and extensive consultations with all the stakeholders, especially, the poor and vulnerable farming 
community. Further, the ESMF will also outline arrangements for consultations with the stakeholders and disclosures 
thereof both during preparation as well as implementation phases.   
 
 All safeguards studies shall be completed and the ESMF publicly disclosed by April 15, 2017. 
 
 



















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh for the National Agricultural
Technology Programme – Phase II Project


People’s Republic of Bangladesh

National Agricultural Technology Programme – Phase II
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: World Bank

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$214 million (net of beneficiary contributions)

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 17 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.8
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): Government of Bangladesh, World Bank, United States
Agency for International Development (USAID)

Amount of cofinancing: World Bank loan: US$176 million
USAID grant: US$7.4 million

Contribution of borrower: US$6.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.5 million

Appraising institution: World Bank

Cooperating institution: World Bank



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the National Agricultural Technology
Programme – Phase II Project, as contained in paragraph 55.

Proposed loan to the National Agricultural Technology
Programme – Phase II Project for the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Building on its remarkable social and economic performance over the past 20

years, the People’s Republic of Bangladesh aims to become a middle-income
country by 2021; achieving this will require that the Government of Bangladesh
overcome considerable challenges in agricultural development and rural economic
growth. The country’s annual GDP growth averaged about 6 per cent between 2000
and 2013, accompanied by a decline in the national poverty headcount rate from
48.9 to 31.5 per cent over the first decade of the century, effectively lifting some
16 million people out of poverty.

2. Bangladesh, a country of over 160 million inhabitants, has also made noteworthy
gains in education and health, and is well set to achieve most of the Millennium
Development Goals. Despite these gains, it remains a poor country, with a 2013
GDP per capita of about US$1,000. Bangladesh is regularly hit by natural disasters
that severely impact the economy, disproportionally affecting the infrastructure
and agriculture sectors, as well as vulnerable groups. Nutrition outcomes have not
kept pace with the progress achieved with most social and economic indicators.

3. Agriculture covers about three quarters of the country’s scarce land and supports
the majority of the population’s livelihoods. While overall poverty has significantly
declined over the last decade, the poverty headcount in rural areas (still around 35
per cent) has not declined as fast as in urban settings; and the proportion of
people living in extreme poverty in rural areas is still three times higher than in
urban areas.

4. Agriculture’s contribution to the country’s economic output has declined over the
past decade, but crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries still account for 17 per cent
of GDP. Some 67 per cent of the population live in rural areas and over 43 per cent
of the country’s total labour force are engaged in agriculture. Therefore, achieving
further socially and environmentally sustainable economic growth and poverty
reduction will require policies and investments conducive to lasting
transformational changes in rural areas – including through technological
innovation in agriculture.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

5. While the performance of the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) has
been impressive in contributing to food security (particularly with rice), research in
some key subsectors (e.g. livestock, fisheries) has yet to reach its potential
productivity in terms of releasing a sufficient stream of useful innovations
(including a range of new climate-smart technologies for production and post-
harvest). The proposed National Agricultural Technology Programme (NATP) – the
second phase of three projects initially planned – will seek to overcome some of



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

the key constraints still holding back the NARS, and to add greater value to the
output of the agricultural sector.

6. The NATP phase two (NATP-II) project is fully aligned with the government’s
priorities, in particular with: (i) the Perspective Plan 2010-2021 outlining the
strategy for achieving food security, making adequate infrastructure available and
pursuing environmentally friendly development; (ii) the Sixth Five-Year Plan (6th
FYP) identifying focal sectors for pro-poor growth, including agriculture, livestock,
community-based fisheries and rural finance; (iii) the policy framework of the
National Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP, 2012); and (iv) the Bangladesh
Agricultural Research Council (BARC, 2011).

7. Being agriculture-centric, the NATP-II project will complement the ongoing IFAD-
funded portfolio in Bangladesh and is fully aligned with the country strategic
opportunities programme’s (COSOP) objectives of achieving: (i) better adapted
livelihoods of poor people in vulnerable areas to climate change; (ii) greater
market access and improved value chains for small producers and entrepreneurs;
and (iii) economic and social empowerment for marginalized groups, including poor
rural women.

II. Programme description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The three-phase programme will cover all of the 64 districts by the

third phase. In this context, NATP-II will cover 57 districts (including the 25
covered by NATP-I) and span a broad range of agroecological zones across
Bangladesh. The project will be implemented over a six-year period in up to 270
subdistricts (or upazillas); this includes 120 already covered under NATP-I, plus up
to 150 new upazillas. New upazillas will be selected following the multicriteria
approach successfully applied under NATP-I (including poverty incidence, high
prevalence of marginal farmers and agroecologically stressed areas).

9. Target group. In compliance with government policies and strategies, the primary
target group for NATP-II will be smallholder farmers: particularly small, marginal
and landless farmers. Special emphasis will be placed on targeting women.

B. Programme development objective
10. The development objective of this project is to increase agricultural productivity of

smallholder farms and improve smallholder farmers’ access to markets in selected
districts. This will be achieved by: (i) strengthening the capacity of the NARS and
the extension services to generate and diffuse agricultural technologies aimed at
increasing farm productivity and reducing post-harvest losses; and (ii) promoting
the sustainability of existing and newly created farmer groups and producer
organizations by facilitating their linkages with markets.

C. Components/outcomes
11. Component 1: Enhancing agricultural technology generation. Component 1

will improve the performance of NARS through the support to agricultural
technology development, and the strengthening of agricultural research institutions
(institutional and human capacity). Research will be funded through competitive
grants. The component will also finance a number of activities (including specific
studies, policy notes, training, research-extension linkages, and others) in support
of the implementation of the 2012 BARC Act approved under NATP.

12. To scale up NATP achievements, the project design includes – embedded in the
different project components – an agricultural innovation fund (AIF). The AIF is at
the core of the NATP-II scale-up strategy; it aims to provide grant funding for
eligible research and microproject proposals to be implemented by potential project
beneficiaries. The AIF is fully aligned with the holistic approach to agricultural
innovation promoted by the project. In order to effectively contribute to achieving



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

the project development objective, the AIF includes the following three funding
windows: (i) AIF-1 (US$26.2 million) will promote agricultural technology
generation through a programme-based research initiative (AIF-1 PBRG) and a
competitive research grant programme (AIF-1 CRG); (ii) AIF-2 (US$17 million),
through matching grants, will promote farmers’ adoption of innovative technologies
generated by the research community; and (iii) AIF-3 (US$4.6 million),
through matching grants, will support private operators in developing business and
market opportunities for farmers, as well as in providing relevant private services
to farmers. NATP-II will use calls for proposals, scientific and technical peer-
reviewing and transparent selection mechanisms for the allocation of all grants
under the AIF; disbursement against the AIF is subject to the Bank’s approval of an
AIF Manual of Operational Guidelines and Procedures. NATP-II will explore
synergies between its AIF and the access to rural financial services promoted under
IFAD’s new project for Promoting Agricultural Commercialization and Enterprises
(PACE).1

13. Component 2: Supporting crop development. Component 2 will increase farm
yields, diversify agricultural production, and improve market linkages for
smallholder farmers by: (i) improving the outreach and quality of crop extension
and advisory services by strengthening the skills of public extension workers from
the Department of Agricultural Extension; (ii) promoting information and
communication technology (ICT) in agricultural extension services and supporting
farmer-to-farmer extension; (iii) developing farmers’ skills to scale up the
dissemination of good agricultural practices including those developed under NATP,
as well as identifying technologies for a sustainable production of safer food;
(iv) promoting farm and off-farm mechanization to increase crop productivity, farm
output and diversification, as well as to increase efficiency in crop handling, reduce
post-harvest losses and support processing; (v) facilitating stronger collaboration
with the private sector for agribusiness development on agroprocessing, market
access for smallholders, as well as for the establishment of machinery hire-
services; and (vi) strengthening institutions involved in the crop sector, through
capacity development and selected investments in infrastructure.

14. Component 3: Supporting fisheries development. Component 3 will promote
productivity, quality and output increases through technology transfer, as well as a
better access to market opportunities for fish farmers. NATP-II will provide support
for the sustainable development of inland culture fisheries (small-scale aquaculture
ponds) and inland capture fisheries (open water fisheries in beels [a lake-like
wetland with static water] and haors [a hoar may host several beels]) by (i) scaling
up NATP good aquaculture practices for the production systems prevailing in the
project area; (ii) promoting community-based fisheries management; (iii)
supporting the participation of fisheries common interest groups (CIGs) and
partner organizations (POs) in value chains; (iv) reinforcing research-extension-
farmer linkages; and (v) strengthening the capacity of fisheries institutions. NATP-
II will explore linkages with fishery activities under the ongoing IFAD-supported
operations in the haors.

15. Component 4: Supporting livestock development. Component 4 will promote
productivity and output increases through enhanced technology transfer, service
delivery, as well as better access for livestock farmers to markets. Activities under
this component will cover dairy farming, goat rearing, beef fattening, and poultry
farming, and focus on: (i) strengthening livestock institutions, improving livestock
extension services, and reinforcing the linkages between research, extension and
livestock farmers; (ii) scaling up outreach programmes to a larger number of

1 PACE aims to enhance the livelihoods of rural women and men by improving profitable business opportunities for
microentrepreneurs, and creating wage employment for extreme and moderatly poor people. PACE will provide NATP-II
finance groups with business planning/development services to prepare business plans for funding through PACE's
microenterprise loan programme. In addition, crop, fisheries and livestock farmers unable to access NATP-II matching
grants could be referred to PACE loan schemes.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

farmers; and (iii) facilitating the participation of smallholder farmers in selected
livestock markets.

16. Component 5: Project management. Activities under this component will:
(i) ensure that the project is carried out in line with the provisions in the official
project documents, in particular all fiduciary and governance aspects; (ii) establish
liaison mechanisms between the World Bank and the project, and between the
project and the Government of Bangladesh, and (iii) coordinate the implementation
of selected overarching project activities with the support of external technical
assistance.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
17. NATP-II will build on and scale up successful interventions and address important

lessons learned from NATP-I. The integrated approach to reaching the project
development objectives will include a foundational component that contributes
towards decentralized, demand-driven agricultural research, as the basis for an
enhanced agricultural technology system. The project will include a further three
subsector components (crops, livestock and fisheries) to address a range of
constraints to technology generation, technology transfer and adoption at farm
level, and farmers’ access to markets. This approach is expected to lead to an
enhanced linkage between agricultural research, extension, and production – an
area regularly reported under NATP as requiring further improvement.

B. Organizational framework
18. The representative of the borrower is the Ministry of Finance. NATP-II will be

implemented under the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead
implementing agency) and the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock. It will be fully
integrated into the Government of Bangladesh administration, and project
implementation is designed to promote the use of existing government structures
at the central level and, when available, at decentralized levels.

19. A joint steering committee, composed of senior representatives from the
agencies under the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock
involved in project implementation, as well as representatives from the farmers
and private sector, who will provide strategic guidance, approve annual budget and
activity plans, monitor overall implementation progress, facilitate interagency
coordination and resolve any outstanding issues requiring high-level decisions.

20. Project management unit. A small project management unit (PMU) will be set up
to oversee implementation of project activities, carry out day-to-day project
management functions, facilitate coordination among components, and liaise with
the World Bank on all project implementation-related aspects. The PMU will also be
in charge of project monitoring and evaluation, producing a project implementation
manual (PIM) that is acceptable to the development partners, detailing the
operational, financial and administrative procedures of NATP-II. The PMU will also
be responsible for the implementation of component 5.

21. Project implementation units. All other project components will be integrated in
the corresponding line department (or agency); each department/agency will set
up a component-specific project implementation unit (PIU). Under the Ministry of
Agriculture, BARC and the Department of Agricultural Extension will each set up a
PIU; BARC for the implementation of component 1 (agricultural technology
generation) and the Department of Agricultural Extension for component 2 (crops).
Under the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock, the Department of Fisheries will set
up a PIU for the implementation of component 3 (fisheries) and the Department of
Livestock Services will set up a PIU for component 4 (livestock). Using project
funds, the Department of Fisheries, Department of Livestock Services and BARC
will recruit service providers (e.g. international institutions, agro-consulting firms,



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

academia or others) to deliver the technical assistance needed for strengthening
their institutional capacity and supporting their PIUs with the implementation of
component-specific activities.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. Planning. The PMU will be responsible for preparing the annual work plan and
budget, getting it approved by the Ministry of Finance and cleared by the World
Bank. The plan will include planned activities along with targets and expenditures
and will reflect the general project targets and activities.

23. Monitoring and evaluation. NATP-II will have a multi-tier results monitoring and
impact evaluation system that will inform on the progress made towards achieving
the development objective. Results will be sex-disaggregated reported as much as
possible to capture the gender dimension of NATP-II.

24. Learning and knowledge management. Knowledge sharing and learning is a
key activity throughout all of NATP-II’s components. The project will utilize ICT for
extension and capacity-building purposes, and further aims to build an agriculture
knowledge repository and a knowledge platform under its ICT initiative. Another
important tool will be the farmers information and advisory centres that will serve
as fully equipped agricultural technology and knowledge-sharing centres.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. A fiduciary assessment of NATP-II was carried out during design, and follows World

Bank procedures. The fiduciary assessment rated the risk in financial management
(FM) as “substantial”, due to (i) the involvement of multiple PIUs and accounting
centres; (ii) the timeliness of consolidation of FM reports; and (iii) compliance with
the requirements of multiple donors. Risk-mitigating measures have been
incorporated into the design of the FM implementation arrangements, and a
number of additional measures will be taken to ensure overall FM capacity and
performance.

26. NATP-II will hire an experienced consultant for the PMU (a senior financial
management specialist), with qualifications acceptable to the Bank and IFAD, to
lead and coordinate FM activities. The consultant will support the project in
strengthening budgeting practices, internal controls, fund reconciliations, and other
relevant financial functions, including coordination with the FM staff at the PIUs.
The current manual system of accounting will be enhanced within 12 months of
project effectiveness by a computerized FM information system to facilitate easy
and timely access to financial information and its consolidation. In order to ensure
that clear practices are harmonized across the project, the PIM will include all the
relevant parts of FM operations, donors’ compliance and financial disclosure. Prior
to effectiveness, the project will also adopt an online, off-the-shelf, web-enabled
accounting software. Annual external audits of all project components will be
conducted by the Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate and will be supplemented
by additional internal audits from an independent audit firm (twice in the project
lifetime).

27. Flow of funds. Financing from the International Development Association (IDA),
IFAD and a USAID trust fund will be disbursed through three separate designated
accounts. These will be opened and operated by the PMU. All PIUs will maintain a
designated operating account to receive funds from the PMU. The IFAD loan will be
administered by the World Bank under a cooperation agreement with IFAD. An
initial advance will be provided and will be replenished based on regular statements
of expenditure. The same method will be applied between the PMU and PIUs. After
the first year of implementation, the Bank will review the FM performance and, in
consultation with IFAD, may recommend converting the disbursement modality to



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

one based on interim unaudited financial reports, including a six-monthly forecast
of fund requirements.

28. Project-related transactions relating to all funding sources (IDA, USAID, IFAD and
the Government of Bangladesh) will be accounted for separately in the PMU
following double-entry bookkeeping principles and on a cash basis. The key project
accounting functions for which the PMU will be responsible are as follows:
(i) budget preparation and monitoring; (ii) payments for eligible project
expenditure to third parties; (iii) disbursement of project funds to various agencies,
as per approved work plan; (iv) maintenance of books and bank accounts; (v) cash
flow management; (vi) financial reporting to the Government of Bangladesh, the
World Bank, IFAD and other stakeholders; (vii) preparation of withdrawal
applications to claim funds from the World Bank and IFAD; and (viii) assistance to
the external auditor and ensuring appropriate follow-up of audit. Details on the
proposed FM and disbursement arrangements can be found in annex 3 of the World
Bank’s Project Appraisal Document.

29. Procurement. Procurement financed under the project will be carried out in
accordance with the World Bank’s “Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works and
Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World
Bank Borrowers” dated July 2014 (Procurement Guidelines) and “Guidelines:
Selection and Employment of Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA
Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers” dated July 2014 (Consultant
Guidelines), and the provisions stipulated in the financing agreement. The
procurement method will depend on the nature of the expenditure and the value of
the contract. The PMU and all PIUs will preserve all procurement records and
documents in accordance with provisions of the Public Procurement Act 2006 (PPA
2006).

30. Procurement under NATP-II will be guided by the World Bank-approved
procurement plan and processed through pooled procurement by the PMU for
selected goods and services (e.g. ICT equipment and peripherals, furniture and
office equipment, consultant services to be provided across various components,
and others) under component 5, and by the four PIUs and the PMU for all other
component-specific goods, works and services. To mitigate procurement risks from
low in-house capacity, the project will contract six procurement specialists
(consultants): two for the PMU and one for each PIU. An acceptable procurement
plan covering the first 18 months of project implementation is available.
Institutional procurement approval will be provided by the respective Head of
Procurement Entities (HOPE) or his/her delegate as per delegation of financial
powers of the four agencies (departments’ Director General and BARC Chairman);
the HOPE for the PMU is the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead
implementing agency).

31. Audit. The Foreign Aided Projects Audit Directorate of the Comptroller and Auditor
General will conduct an audit of the project’s annual financial statements within six
months from the end of the fiscal year. The project director will be responsible for
audit follow-up and taking remedial actions. Internal audits will include prepayment
audits and independent appraisals of the financial, operational and control activities
in the sector. The responsibilities of the internal auditors will further include
reporting on the adequacy of internal controls, the accuracy and propriety of
transactions, the extent to which assets are accounted for and safeguarded, and
the level of compliance with financial procedures and government laws and
regulations. The first audit will be due by the end of the second year of
implementation.

32. Governance. Lessons learned over the last five years to improve project
implementation and safeguard against potential governance issues have been
incorporated in the project design, implementation arrangements and monitoring



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures. The project design allows for full and distinct accountability with a
single line agency (BARC, Department of Fisheries and Department of Livestock
Services) for each component. Project monitoring and impact evaluation will be
carried out in collaboration with the PMU and the PIUs by an independent entity
recruited competitively and operating with national and international consultants.
An independent assessment (technical and financial audit) of the AIF will be carried
out for project midterm review to improve the grant system’s performance
accordingly. Beneficiaries’ feedback will be obtained through IT apps tailored to the
project’s needs and channelled directly to the NATP-II management information
system’s area coordinated by the third-party monitoring firm. The project will also
set up project-level grievance redress mechanisms with local communities being
consulted early in the process. In addition, in line with the Bank’s Disclosure Policy
and the country’s Right to Information Act, all information in the project shall be
made public.

33. Several risks and risks mitigation measures related to procurement, financial
management, and environmental and social safeguards compliance have already
been described in the corresponding parts of the project appraisal document. In
order to further minimize governance and corruption risks, NATP-II will follow a
Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP). This plan outlines a framework
for action, institutional arrangements, specific responsibilities, and additional
measures to facilitate effective and appropriate use of project funds. It is based on
the Bank’s and IFAD’s experiences in addressing governance and anticorruption
issues. The GAAP will be adjusted as necessary during implementation to reflect
governance issues that may emerge and/or to strengthen or add actions.

E. Supervision
34. The IFAD loan will be administered and supervised by the World Bank.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
35. The total estimated cost of NATP-II amounts to US$214 million (net of beneficiary

contribution), inclusive of contingencies and taxes.

B. Programme financing
36. Of the total cost of US$214 million, US$23.8 million will be financed through an

IFAD loan on highly concessional terms. The World Bank will be providing a loan of
US$176 million and USAID will contribute a grant of US$7.4 million. The
contribution of the Government of Bangladesh, in the form of parallel cofinancing,
will cover all vehicles purchased for NATP-II, as well as the salaries of civil servants
assigned to work full-time on the project, and other expenses.2 The financing of
taxes on eligible expenditures will be permitted with IFAD funds, to harmonize with
IDA practice and simplify the project’s accounting and disbursement procedures.

2 As per the table, the Government of Bangladesh contribution reported amounts to US$6.65 million (or 3 per cent of
project costs). This is likely to be underestimated, as it does not include the hiring by DOF and DLS of upazilla-level
extension staff. However, since this process is underway and has not yet been submitted to the Manpower Committee
(Finance Division/Ministry of Finance), the final number of staff that actually will be recruited is not yet known. Hence, the
exact amount to be added to the reported government contribution is not yet available.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table
Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan World Bank loan
USAID Gov't of

Bangladesh Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Goods, works,
services and
operating costs

19.0 11.5 140.0 84.5 6.7 4.0 165.7

2. AIF-13 2.3 8.8 16.5 63.0 7.4 28.2 26.2
3. AIF-2 2.0 11.8 15.0 88.2 17.0
4. AIF-3 0.5 10.9 4.0 87.0 4.6
5. Project
preparation
advance (World
Bank)

0.5 100.0 0.5

Total 23.8 11.1 176.0 82.2 7.4 3.5 6.7 3.1 214

37. In addition, beneficiaries will be required to provide cash contributions towards the
matching grants. Beneficiary contribution is expected to amount to US$6.5 million.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. Project benefits. It is estimated that over one million farming households will

directly benefit from project activities, including from improved extension services,
stronger linkages with research, on-farm demonstrations of new technologies,
capacity enhancement through training and skills development, as well as
cofunding productive assets. Based on previous experience, significant spillover
effects and knowledge transfer to farmers who are not members of groups
supported by NATP (the CIGs) can be anticipated. Therefore, all members of the
supported farming communities will potentially benefit from the technologies
generated, the improved extension services provided, as well as from the market
linkages developed. Up to three million farmers in the project area are expected to
benefit from NATP-II. The project will promote gender mainstreaming and women’s
empowerment to ensure that a significant proportion of direct beneficiaries is
female.

39. Economic analysis. The parameters used in making these projections were based
on the NATP-I experience and impact. On this basis, the NATP-II internal rate of
return is calculated at 28 per cent, the project’s economic rate of return (ERR) at
31 per cent, and the corresponding net present value at US$49.9 million. This ERR
remains robust under hypothetical scenarios of a 10 per cent decrease in expected
net revenues and/or a 10 per cent increase in project costs.

D. Sustainability
40. To ensure the durability of the model for technology transfer and delivery of

advisory services to farmers, NATP-II will promote a pluralistic extension system
that supports various complementary elements (e.g. public extension staff, local
private extension agents, lead farmers, Farmers’ Information and Advice Centres,
ICT connectivity, gender focus).

41. Improved access to knowledge, markets, market and price information and
financial services will help contribute to the sustainability of CIGs and POs
supported by the project. To further increase smallholders’ voices and economic
strength in the selected value chains, NATP-II will establish producer organizations
for farmers. In addition, bankable CIGs and POs will be linked up with financing
institutions involved in other programmes/projects supporting access to finances.

3 For explanation of AIF-1, AIF-2 and AIF-3 see para. 12.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

42. The sustainability of NATP-II outcomes will further be supported by the institutional
capacity and skills development agenda of the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. The overall risks of NATP-II not achieving the project development objectives and

targets, and for NATP-II activities to have a negative impact on the people and the
environment are considered substantial.

44. The substantial risks identified with regard to policies and sector strategies refer to
the potential for lack of operationalization of the Bangladesh Agricultural Research
Council Act; delays in hiring public extension workers by the Ministry of Fisheries
and Livestock; and the lengthy approval process for the validation of the NAEP.
Under NATP-II, these will be addressed through: (i) strengthening the BARC
institutional capacity in the area of research management by hiring an international
service provider; (ii) expanding the use of private community-based extension
agents for livestock and fisheries with the aim of developing sustainable models for
private extension (e.g. scaling up fee-based services for livestock, promoting
additional sources of revenues for local extension agents for fisheries; and
(iii) adopting in NATP-II some of the core pillars of the NAEP (e.g. promoting a
group approach, complementary farmer-to-farmer extension; promoting private
extension services, etc.).

45. The substantial risk identified with respect to institutional capacity for
implementation refers to the challenges in coordinating four line agencies from two
different ministries and their capacity to implement the respective components. As
shown in the previous project, the coordination challenge can be adequately
addressed through a neutral PMU that has strong leadership. The recruitment of a
senior project director and a team of technical experts (consultants only, no civil
servants) at the PMU level will be a key factor for the successful coordination
across line agencies. An important mitigation measure in the implementation
arrangements for NATP-II (different from the previous project) is the support from
service providers recruited internationally for each line agency.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
46. NATP-2 is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and with the

current RB-COSOP for Bangladesh, focusing on market access and value chains,
and on the economic empowerment of marginalized people. The project design
adheres to IFAD policies on private sector participation, environment, targeting and
gender. It further complies with the World Bank’s safeguards on indigenous people.
In terms of environmental impacts, the project is classified as “B”.

B. Alignment and harmonization
47. The project, whose design has seen the close involvement of the Government of

Bangladesh, will support the Government’s strategic priorities in agriculture, i.e.
increasing production, achieving food security, supporting adaptation to climate
change, and enhancing nutrition through safer and more diversified food. NATP-II
will support the decentralization process already under way for agricultural
research and extension services.

48. Project implementation will be done through existing government structures at
central level and, when available, at decentralized levels.

49. NATP-II will be cofinanced by the World Bank and USAID. It benefits from the
experience of all three partners and will link up with existing and relevant projects,
such as the IFAD-supported PACE project and the Haor Infrastructure and
Livelihood Improvement Project.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Innovations and scaling up
50. With the Agricultural Innovation Fund, NATP-II offers a tool to promote research

efforts for new and innovative technologies. The AIF is at the core of the NATP-II
scaling-up strategy; it aims at providing grant funding for eligible research and
microproject proposals to be implemented by potential project beneficiaries. The
AIF promotes a competitive research grant programme; farmers’ adoption of
innovative technologies generated by the research community; and will support
private operators in developing business and market opportunities for farmers and
by providing relevant private services to farmers (through matching grants).

D. Policy engagement
51. With its contributions to the agricultural technology development, NATP-II is

expected to support policies that create an enabling environment for smallholder
farmers. This work will include commodity-specific market and value chain
analyses, and the preparation of sector policy notes for senior decision makers.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. A programme financing agreement between the People’s Republic of Bangladesh

and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing
to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in an amount equivalent to seventeen
million special drawing rights (SDR 17,000,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project

Republic of Nepal

Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Nepal

Executing agency: Ministry of Industry

Total project cost: US$68.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.50 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.8 million)

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

SDR 11.95 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.8 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent
(0.75 per cent) per annum

Amount of cofinancing: US$13.7 million

Terms of cofinancing: The private-sector contribution will mostly consist of
cost-sharing of capacity-building and outreach
promotion by financial institutions

Contribution of borrower: US$9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Nepal for Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Nepal has a population of 26.6 million people, of whom 56 per cent are 20-40

years of age. It is a low-income country with a per capita GDP of US$642, which is
the second lowest in South Asia. Since the end of the decade-long internal conflict
in 2006, insecurity and political instability have contributed to relatively slow GDP
growth. The majority of the population still lives on low-input/low-output
agriculture that provides limited income. Thus wage labour and widespread
migration have obligated 3 million Nepalese, mostly from rural areas, to be
employed abroad. The development of the service sector is partly due to a boom in
migration remittances, which have multiplied by a factor of six since 2003-2004,
now reaching 25 per cent of GDP, to about 55 per cent of rural households and still
increasing. Additionally, the poverty incidence decreased from 42 per cent in 1996
to 25 per cent in 2010, primarily due to the impact of remittances.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. Samriddhi1 – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project has been developed in line
with the 2013-2018 results-based COSOP (RB-COSOP) and the Government of
Nepal’s request to harness remittances in support of entrepreneurship.

3. In line with Nepal’s National Development Plan, Industry Policy and Agriculture
Development Strategy, the project will diversify the range of economic activities
accessible to poor rural households and unemployed young men and women
through two main avenues. First, it will promote self-employment and small
businesses and microenterprises that can generate better incomes and jobs –
through both on farm and off-farm activities. Second, it will promote vocational
training and apprenticeship in direct connection with gainful job placement. In
addition, the approach to rural enterprises and remittances (RER) will develop
mechanisms specifically targeting migrant households and returnees, so they can
make the best possible use of their remittances.

4. Samriddhi will contribute to all three RB-COSOP strategic objectives. It will be the
first IFAD project to scale up Financing Facility for Remittances good practices into
an investment project, as well as the first to promote a comprehensive set of
mechanisms fostering remittance investment in livelihood development in Nepal.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will be implemented in 16 districts of the Eastern and Central

Development Regions. It will use a corridor approach that links districts along the
main roads running south to north to facilitate the connection of hill districts to
larger markets in the terai (plains). Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,000

1 ‘Samriddhi’ is a Nepali word meaning prosperous or economically well-off.



EB 2015/114/R.13

2

primary beneficiaries, which will include existing rural micro/cottage and small
enterprises (RMSEs), poor households, returnee migrants and small enterprises.
The secondary target group will include medium and large enterprises as well as
service providers, who will be harnessed to provide support to the primary target
group through the development of business partnerships, vocational training,
apprenticeship packages and job placement. The project will also provide financial
education to 244,800 people to support financial inclusion.

6. Samriddhi will adopt an inclusive approach in which all existing micro-cottage and
small enterprises and all potential entrepreneurs – involved in both farming and
non-farming activities – will be eligible to access project-sponsored services in the
target districts. However, project support will vary according to the size of
enterprises, with a higher proportion of project grant funding provided to family-
based enterprises and the poorest groups, and a lesser proportion extended to
small enterprises. In addition, the project will ensure that poorer households,
women and other disadvantaged groups have access to project services and that
these are adapted to their needs.

B. Project development objective
7. The project goal is to contribute to reducing poverty and achieving sustainable

peace through employment-focused, equitable and inclusive economic
development. The development objective is that viable RMSEs, in both farm and
off-farm sectors, provide sustainable sources of income to poor households,
migrant families and returnees. Main indicators are: (i) 57,500 rural entrepreneurs
expand their existing business or create a new one; (ii) 30,000 rural youth access
job placement services; (iii) 34,500 enterprises are supported by Samriddhi
(22,500 new and 12,000 existing); and (iv) 21,000 vocational trainees and
apprentices are supported by Samriddhi, of which no less than 33 per cent are
women.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project has three components: Component 1 – Promotion of RMSEs aims to

(i) provide micro and small entrepreneurs with sustainable access to adapted
business development services, so they can expand existing businesses or create
new ones; and (ii) assist members of poor households in building their skills and
securing gainful wage employment in RMSEs. Activities will be driven by an
assessment of markets, business opportunities and available services and by an
inventory and classification of existing RMSEs through a validation process.
Enterprise Service Centres (ESCs)2 will facilitate RMSE linkages with financial and
non-financial service providers, provide counselling services and information,
promote business partnerships and manage a system for the qualification,
capacity-building and quality monitoring of service providers.

9. Component 2 – Productive investment aims to (i) support the access of
RMSEs, migrants and remittance recipient households to responsive and suitable
financial services; and (ii) facilitate the financial inclusion of migrants and their
families, support their access to reintegration and peer-counselling services and
harness remittances for productive investment in rural enterprises. It will develop
innovative financial instruments designed to offset major constraints faced by
RMSEs in affordably accessing investment loans and to stimulate migrants’ savings
and investment in small business development. This will include: a risk-sharing
scheme to address RMSEs lack of collateral; a performance-based matching grant
scheme for family and microenterprises with insufficient cash flow to borrow money
in the initial stages of microenterprise development; and a departure loan buy-
back scheme targeting migrants. Capacity-building will be provided to financial
institutions in target districts, and in particular to savings and credit cooperatives

2 In Nepali: ‘samriddhi ko dhoka’ – the door to well-being.



EB 2015/114/R.13

3

(SCCs) and to Small Farmers Cooperatives Limited, to deliver responsive services
to the target population.

10. Component 3 – Institutional support and project management aims to
promote a favourable policy and institutional environment supporting the
development of RMSEs and the contribution of migration to sustainable
development. To this effect, Samriddhi will finance policy studies and research, as
well as activities enabling selected stakeholders representing the interests of
RMSEs or of migration stakeholders to participate in policy dialogue with the
Government. Additionally, Samriddhi will support capacity-building of institutions
that play a key role in creating a conducive environment for small businesses and
microenterprises and for migrants’ reintegration. Finally, it will assist in setting up
a multi-stakeholder platform on migration and development (MPMD), which will
provide a venue for policy dialogue on the integration of migration into the
development agenda and for developing policy measures to facilitate migrant
reintegration and to promote their economic initiatives in the country.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The project strategy is driven by a primary concern that existing RMSEs need

support at national and local levels to develop, increase family income, generate
economic activities and improve employment. In addition, the promotion of RMSEs
must rest on sustainable structures and on mechanisms allowing continued access
of entrepreneurs to commercially-oriented services even beyond project
completion. Thus the project is designed as a temporary intervention aiming to
prepare public and private stakeholders to take over the responsibilities and costs
of securing continued RMSEs access to financial and non-financial services.

B. Organizational framework
12. The set-up of Samriddhi is based on public/private partnerships geared to support

inclusive and sustainable rural economic growth. While the Government retains
overall implementation and facilitation responsibility, non-governmental players will
have a key role in providing business development and financial services to target
groups for the creation and expansion of RMSEs and for maximizing the
development impact of migrant remittances through business investment.
Implementation arrangements also take stock of the long-lasting and strong
partnership between the Government and the Federation of Nepal Chambers of
Commerce and Industry, which is already implementing several initiatives
supporting RMSEs and rural producers.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. The integrated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management (KM)
system will be developed in accordance with government frameworks and with
IFAD guidelines. It will have three main objectives: steer project implementation;
support economic decisions and policymaking; and share knowledge and scale up
good practices.

14. The M&E/KM cycle will start with the preparation of the annual workplan and
budget (AWP/B). All Samriddhi stakeholders will have an active and important role
in identifying and reporting data. M&E officers at all levels will ensure that women
are adequately represented in this process and that they are supported in voicing
their specific concerns. To guarantee an inclusive M&E/KM system, Samriddhi will
provide capacity-building to the project management team (PMT), corridor teams
and ESC staff.

15. The purpose of knowledge management is to ensure that knowledge generated
within the project is systematically identified, analysed, documented and shared.



EB 2015/114/R.13

4

Particular attention will be given to documenting: innovative models; information
to be shared with and discussed by the MPMD with a view to assessing progress
and discussing measures to improve performance; and Learning Routes, which will
be organized to support the exchange of knowledge and good practices among
ESCs.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management will be governed by Ministry of Finance regulations and

will be in line with IFAD guidelines on financial management. The financial
management system will be under the overall responsibility of the Samriddhi
project manager and the accounts officer. A finance and administrative officer will
also be competitively hired from the open market. The draft project
implementation manual (PIM) – established at final design and to be approved by
IFAD – includes a financial management section describing IFAD procedures for the
withdrawal application process, flow of funds, accounting and financial reporting
and audit requirements. A complete financial management assessment was
undertaken and the residual risk was found to be ‘medium’, to be mitigated
efficiently through the following measures: professional software-based
accounting; stringent reporting requirements; accountability; internal audit
provision; and a detailed finance manual. Two designated accounts in United States
dollars will be opened at the Nepal Rastra Bank (central bank), through which
advance resources from the loan and grant will be channelled respectively. The
Government’s Financial Administration Regulations will be used as the basis for
accounting and appropriate controls over financial transactions, and will be
supplemented by separate ledgers, registers and reporting formats to record and
report IFAD expenditures by categories, components, subcomponents and
activities. Consolidated project financial statements will be prepared in accordance
with internationally recognized accounting standards.

17. Internal control and audit. The PMT accounts officer will be responsible for
tracking project expenditure, managing assets and procurement and monitoring
fiduciary aspects of district- and corridor-level project activities. The project will
continue the existing practice of internal audit by the District Treasury Control
Office, in line with government financial rules and regulations. With regard to
external audit, the Office of the Auditor General is considered an independent body
under the respective government offices and is responsible for final project audit.
Audits shall be carried out in accordance with International Standards on Auditing
and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits.

18. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and services financed from
resources provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with
the provision of the Public Procurement Act and associated regulations, Public
Procurement Rules and the provisions of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and
Handbook. Goods and services (non-consulting) procured using national
competitive bidding, national shopping and direct contracting will follow the
procedures and processes defined in the PIM to be approved by the project
steering committee (PSC) and IFAD. The selection of individual consultants and
individual service providers will also be defined in the PIM, which will provide
details of the selection method to be applied.

E. Supervision
19. Annual supervision missions will be organized by IFAD jointly with the Government,

in close collaboration with field-level implementers and project stakeholders.
Supervision will not be conducted as an inspection, but will rather offer an
opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly, to review innovations and
to reflect on improvement measures.



EB 2015/114/R.13

5

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
20. Total project investment and recurrent costs are estimated at US$68.2 million over

seven years, including physical and price contingencies. Total baseline costs are
US$57.60 million.

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Private
sector -

financing
institutions

The
Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

A. Promotion of rural micro-cottage and small
enterprises

Mapping and setting up capacities at district and
regional levels

2 266 4 257 - 364 1 124 8 012

Services for RMSE promotion and development 10 314 758 1 836 - 1 929 14 837

Vocational training and apprenticeships 3 931 1 342 - 209 3 489 8 972

Subtotal promotion of rural micro-cottage and
small enterprises

16 511 6 357 1 836 573 6 542 31 821

B. Productive investment

Rural finance 1 534 5 258 4 800 13 175 219 24 987

Mobilizing migrant resources and skills 367 514 - - 1 476 2 356

Subtotal productive investment 1 901 5 772 4 800 13 175 1 695 27 343

C. Institutional support and project management

Policy and institutional development 404 1 942 - 1 410 2 757

Project management 2 979 2 744 - - 501 6 224

Subtotal institutional support and project
management

3 383 4 686 - 1 911 8 981

Total costs 21 795 16 815 6 636 13 749 9 148 68 145

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

* Final disbursement categories will be decided during negotiations based on IFAD’s procedures, which will include a
maximum of five cost categories for reasons of efficiency.



EB 2015/114/R.13

6

B. Project financing
21. The Government of Nepal, IFAD, the private sector and beneficiaries will finance

the project. IFAD total financing amounts to US$38.61 million, equivalent to
56.7 per cent of total project financing (24.7 per cent under the form of a Debt
Sustainability Framework grant and 32 per cent through a highly concessional
loan). The Government would finance taxes, duties and salaries, and is further
expected to contribute to the cost of the salary of one staff member for each ESC
and to vocational training, for a total of US$9.1 million. The private sector
contribution is estimated at US$13.7 million. Overall beneficiaries’ contributions are
estimated at US$6.6 million.

22. Taxes and duties will not be financed by IFAD.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
23. Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,660 primary beneficiaries:

60,000 entrepreneurs; 89,660 people who will access jobs generated by the newly
created and expanded RMSEs; and about 30,000 people, mostly youth, who will
benefit from vocational training and apprenticeship.

24. Additionally, the project will provide financial education in-country and abroad to
213,100 people, mostly migrants and migrants’ households. An estimated
10 per cent of these will access other project services.

25. The secondary target group will include: (i) medium and large enterprises and
service providers, who will extend support to the primary target group; and
(ii) 22,500 enterprises (from category B to medium and large), who will benefit
from capacity-building to make the best use of apprenticeships.

26. Furthermore, project investments will lead to indirect benefits for RMSEs and poor
households beyond the target area.

27. The base-case scenario for a 20-year period of analysis shows an economic rate of
return of 26 per cent and a net present value of US$37.7 million.

D. Sustainability
28. Samriddhi strategy and activities are driven by the primary concern that, by the

end of project implementation, sustainable mechanisms will ensure continued
RMSE access to financial and non-financial services. This will be attained through:
(i) public/private partnerships that provide target groups with sufficient returns and
include capacity-building and expansion opportunities; (ii) financial sustainability of
RMSEs and ESCs through sound business plans, with incentives to support start-
up, cost-recovery mechanisms, capacity-building of key players, linkages to
performing financial service providers (SPs) and resource mobilization; (iii) use of
local resources to develop entrepreneurship, expand the range of business
development services SPs and generate jobs; and (iv) promotion of business
partnerships between the smallest enterprises and value chain aggregators, which
will facilitate continued RMSEs access to services and markets and promote their
growth beyond initial project-financed support.

29. The second interim review, planned for the end of the fifth year, will make
recommendations with regard to key measures required to secure the sustainability
of project achievements, based on which the PMT will prepare a detailed exit
strategy.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
30. Most risks associated with this project remain medium or low, and mitigation

measures have been identified for all risks. The three risks remaining high are
given below.



EB 2015/114/R.13

7

31. Risks associated with the project related to the Government or other development
organizations paying protracted subsidies and in-kind support to entrepreneurs to
establish their businesses, which will be mitigated by sharing implementation
modalities and successful achievements with the MPMD and government partners
to foster harmonization. In addition, Samriddhi and ESCs will negotiate
coordination agreements at the district level to ensure that subsidies do not
undermine the Samriddhi approach to sustainability.

32. The risk that the volume of service business will not be sufficient to generate an
adequate income for full-time SPs will be mitigated by project support to several
mechanisms facilitating sustainable SP access.

33. The risk that public/private migration stakeholders fail to take responsibility for the
operation and financing of the MPMD will be mitigated by project interventions to:
(i) set up the platform and develop plans and tools; (ii) finance the MPMD
secretariat and operations; (iii) draft a law to institutionalize the platform; and
(iv) support migrant organizations in developing advocacy skills.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The design of Samriddhi was guided by IFAD’s policies and strategies on: targeting,
gender and private-sector engagement. The project is in line with IFAD’s specific
objectives on remittances, which aim to: enhance market development and
financial access through the identification, replication and scaling up of innovative
remittance transfer systems; promote financial inclusion among migrants and
remittance-recipient families in rural areas through better use of remittances; and
create an enabling environment that promotes public/private partnerships for
effective remittance development strategies.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
35. A PSC will be set up at the national level to: provide overall guidance and

oversight; ensure that Samriddhi programming is aligned with national-sector
priorities; and offer a venue for sharing Samriddhi good practices and for
channelling policy issues to the appropriate policymaking bodies. The PSC will also
approve annual AWP/Bs and annual progress and financial reports.

36. Samriddhi will rely on existing district industry promotion committees to: develop a
dialogue among stakeholders involved in RMSE development; discuss RMSE
constraints and value chain bottlenecks; agree on measures required to free them;
and identify policy gaps and provide guidance to ESCs. It will ensure that ESC
activities are inclusive of women and poor people, and that gender equality and
social inclusion issues are addressed as part of their regular agenda.

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The PMT and business development services technical assistance will assist ESCs in

developing innovative modalities for service delivery, such as: (i) developing
systems alternative to price (commissions or mark-ups) that link payment to actual
results/impact on business; (ii) promoting SPs that have an existing business and
do not rely solely on service provision to make a living, including cooperatives or
producers’ associations; and (iii) assisting SPs in developing businesses in
conjunction with RMSEs promotion (for example, large farmers buying agricultural
products from serviced farmers). Innovative models will be thoroughly documented
with support from corridor teams and will be shared across target regions and
through multistakeholder platforms at the district industry promotion committee
level, regional (Eastern Business Forum) and national levels (National Business
Forum, the project steering committee).



EB 2015/114/R.13

8

Policy engagementD.
38. The project will support selected stakeholders representing the interests of RMSEs

or of migrants to participate in policy dialogue with the Government. Samriddhi will
finance studies and research enabling such stakeholders to: (i) develop policy
positions; (ii) organize policy consultations of members at regional and national
levels; and (iii) acquire advocacy skills.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A financing agreement between the Republic of Nepal and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

40. The Republic of Nepal is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Nepal in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Nepal in an amount equivalent to eleven million nine hundred and fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 11,950,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic
Strategic Support for Food Security and
Nutrition Project – Global Agriculture and
Food Security Program (GAFSP) funds


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
– Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP)
funds

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total project cost: US$38.8 million

Amount of Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program (GAFSP) grant funds:

US$24 million
(supervised by IFAD)

US$6 million
(supervised by the World Food Programme [WFP])

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$459,000

Contribution of recipient: US$5.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.9 million

Appraising institutions: IFAD and the GAFSP steering committee

Cooperating institutions: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Strategic Support for Food
Security and Nutrition Project, as contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition
Project – Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
(GAFSP) funds

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the last two decades, the economy of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic

has experienced an average annual growth rate of 7 per cent, sustained by
macroeconomic liberalization, market-based reforms and large flows of foreign
direct investment into natural resource-based industries (such as mining and
hydroelectricity) and agriculture.

2. While the gross domestic product (GDP) share of agriculture declined from
53 per cent to 27.5 per cent between 2000 and 2014, this sector remains the
largest source of employment, with more than 70 per cent of the population
deriving its livelihoods from agriculture. This indicates that economic growth has
created few jobs in other sectors. The agriculture sector’s annual growth rate
averaged nearly 5 per cent at the end of the 1990s, but declined to just 2 per cent
in 2012. Much of the country’s growth has resulted from the expansion of
cultivation areas to accommodate a rural workforce that is growing by 2.5 per cent
per year. But overall productivity is still low in the farming sector and per capita
income is less than half the national average. Most of the country’s
650,000 farming households are engaged in subsistence and low-productivity
agriculture.

3. Economic growth has resulted in a steady decline of the national poverty index,
which dropped from 46 per cent of the population in the mid-1990s to 23 per cent
in 2012. Poverty and extreme poverty are most common in mountainous regions,
where the majority of the country’s indigenous peoples live. In upland areas, the
national poverty rate is as high as 43 per cent, compared with 28 per cent in the
lowlands. The country moved from a rice deficit in 1996 to surplus production in
2006. However, accessibility to rice and protein sources is highly contingent upon
geography and income. Malnutrition is high, with 44 per cent of children under 5 in
rural areas suffering from stunting (chronic undernutrition). The communities most
prone to undernutrition live in upland areas, where household economic activities
are increasingly constrained by unsustainable farming practices, large-scale land
concessions, limited adaptation to climate change and a lack of financing, access to
markets and support services.

4. In June 2015, the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) – a multi-
donor financing facility – approved a US$30 million proposal presented by the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in support of food security and
nutrition. IFAD was selected as the supervising entity for the investment and the
World Food Programme (WFP) was chosen as the supervising entity for technical
assistance.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

2

5. According to the provisions of the GAFSP Trust Fund transfer agreement entered
into by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) (as
trustee) and IFAD, IBRD shall transfer to IFAD the funds approved by the GAFSP
steering committee for project implementation. These funds shall be used by IFAD
in accordance with its policies and procedures, and in line with the decisions of the
GAFSP steering committee as specified in the approved project document.

6. In line with the transfer agreement, IFAD shall enter into an agreement with the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in accordance with the policies
and procedures of the Fund.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based COSOP

7. The GAFSP grant for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
(SSFSNP) is designed to pilot new approaches and technologies, and scale up
existing technologies and systems to accelerate the Government’s progress towards
national food security and improved nutrition. The SSFSNP is one of the first
development projects in the country to comprehensively address the agricultural
constraints to improved nutrition within the framework of the convergence
approach, as stipulated in the National Nutrition Strategy to 2025 and Plan of
Action 2016-2020 (NNSPA).

8. Project interventions will focus on the implementation of four nutrition-sensitive
agricultural activities among the NNSPA’s 22 priority interventions. Other
development partners’ projects and government programmes are addressing the
remaining interventions. The project will focus on building an enabling environment
for sustainable market-led improvements in nutrition-rich and diverse agricultural
production, and rural employment through: (i) participatory, bottom-up
village-level public investment planning and implementation; (ii) the empowerment
of women to improve family diets, especially during the first 1,000 days of life;
(iii) the development of farmer organizations linking men and women farmers to
markets; (iv) the application of a demand-driven extension approach emphasizing
decentralized farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-farmer extension; and (v) support
for private agribusiness investment, seeking business models that are clearly
aligned with both development and growth objectives. In addition, the project will
promote “green technology”, with all interventions having a neutral or positive
impact on communities’ ability to adapt to climate change.

9. The financing for SSFSNP is in line with the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2011–2016, which comprises three strategic objectives:
(i) community-based access to and management of land and natural resources;
(ii) access to advisory services and inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated
farming systems; and (iii) access to markets.

II. Project Description
A. Project area and target group
10. Project area: The project will be implemented in 12 districts and approximately

400 villages in the four provinces of Oudomxay, Phongsali, Xiangkhouang and
Houaphan in the northern part of the country. The villages will be selected based
on: (i) poverty data; (ii) potential for agriculture-led growth, including expansion of
the agriculture and forest resource base, irrigation development and market
access; (iii) commitment of village leadership; (iv) an assessment of climate
change vulnerability; and (v) opportunities for convergence with other ongoing or
planned projects.

11. Target population: The target group will comprise poor rural households in the
400 selected villages. To ensure that women have equal and priority access to
project benefits, SSFSNP will include measures to increase women’s participation



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

3

and influence in their communities, including equal gender representation in
SSFSNP village development committees.

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to reduce extreme poverty and malnutrition in the poorest

communities. The development objective is to ensure that improved and diversified
agricultural production and household nutrition enhance livelihoods and well-being.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project has three main components as well as a component for project

management:

Component 1: Strengthened public services. This component will underpin the
development of government capacities, procedures and technical skills to support –
and converge – community implementation of selected national nutrition strategy
interventions. It comprises: (i) the establishment of a tiered project planning,
supervision, monitoring and knowledge management system within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry; and (ii) strengthening the capacities of district
departments of agricultural extension, district technical service centres and the
National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute to deliver sustainable
climate-adapted and nutrition-sensitive agriculture and natural resource
management technologies and training.

Component 2: Community-driven agriculture-based nutrition interventions.
This component will be supervised by WFP. It has two subcomponents:

(i) Planning for improved nutritional outcomes. This comprises support for
multi-sector convergence planning at the district level to accelerate the
implementation of the NNSPA. It includes the mapping of various
stakeholders’ programmes and infrastructure assets to identify development
gaps at the village level. Simultaneously, the project will support improved
village development planning by building the capacity of village stakeholders
to lead the development process in their communities. The preparation of
three-year multi-sector, nutrition-sensitive village development plans (VDPs)
will be supported by experienced community planning service providers.

(ii) Women-led improvement in household nutrition. This encompasses the
rollout of a social behavioural change communication programme jointly
supported by SSFSNP and the World Bank-financed Health Governance and
Nutrition Development Project in all project villages. It aims to encourage
nutrition-enhancing behaviours that maximize the benefit of the project’s
investments in the four NNSPA agriculture interventions. The project will
support the establishment of monthly village-level “farmer nutrition schools”
to balance agricultural production, wild food collection and food purchase
throughout all seasons of the year. It will enable villages to increase the
availability of food for improved dietary diversity.

Component 3: Sustainable and inclusive market-driven partnerships. This
component includes two subcomponents:

(i) Profitable investment in nutrient-sensitive, climate-adapted
agriculture. The project will identify commodities that have investment
potential and that comply with the provincial socioeconomic development
plans. Commodities will be selected based on: their potential for commercial
production of nutritious food for export or import substitution; and the
likelihood of poor rural households to invest in increasing their production and
expanding employment. Strategic investment plans will be prepared in all
selected communities. These plans will inform the VDP process and provide a
framework for forming agriculture production groups and inviting
entrepreneurs to invest in the project area. Based on this exercise, the project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

4

will co-finance VDP-identified communities’ and farmer organizations’
investments in profitable and sustainable, nutrient-sensitive agricultural
production through a village development fund.

(ii) Linking Farmers to markets. With support from the Ministry of Planning
and Investment, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, the project will
include a review of the current contract farming programme in the project
area and propose amendments to government legislation, regulations and
implementation procedures underpinning contract farming agreements. The
aim is to establish more equitable and productive agreements that benefit
farmers and investors alike. This will include technical assistance in support
of improved contract farming policies. Based on this experience, the project
will pilot the use of public-private partnership funding to promote investments
and job opportunities among rural enterprises and households.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
14. The SSFSNP will be implemented over a six-year period. Nutrition has been

mainstreamed into all three project components, and each activity will contribute to
improved nutrition. Simultaneous actions on food, childcare and feeding practices,
access to quality health care and water and sanitation will be undertaken for
greatest impact. The management structure will be based on the lessons learned
through previous IFAD projects in the country and the region, and will avoid parallel
management systems while implementing transparent mechanisms for financial
management and fund transfer.

B. Organizational framework
15. A national project steering committee will be responsible for overall direction of the

project and for the convergence of SSFSNP activities with those of other
development partners. This committee will comprise representatives from the
Ministries of Agriculture and Forestry; Finance; Planning and Investment; and
Health and from the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, in addition to
the four provincial governors or vice-governors. It will be co-chaired by the Vice-
Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry, and Health. Steering committees will also be
established at the provincial level. Through its Department of Planning and
Cooperation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will be the lead agency, with
overall responsibility for project implementation. This ministry will delegate
responsibilities to district administrations and to the national project coordination
office (NPCO) based in Vientiane. The NPCO will be supported by an internationally
recruited chief technical advisor.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The project’s monitoring and evaluation
system will: (i) guide project implementation through the assessment and analysis
of project outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’ nutrition and
livelihoods; and (ii) share knowledge by capturing lessons learned, good practices
and successful innovations, and publishing them on knowledge platforms. The
system will monitor both operational and financial aspects of the project.

17. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s knowledge management
and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share knowledge,
support innovation dissemination; identify issues for advocacy with policymakers;
and provide information to support scaling up. This will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote nutrition-rich upland agriculture initiatives; and (ii) various



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

5

formats for dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-
farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
18. Financial Management. As custodian of funds in the project account, the NPCO

will be responsible for project financial management. The NPCO will also be
accountable to the Government and IFAD for the proper use of funds in line with
the legal agreements and contractual arrangements for service providers. It will
provide detailed financial statements of project operations, resources and
expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and procedures
acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the project rated the
fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close supervision, support
and oversight from the IFAD subregional office for: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the recruitment  of competent and qualified
financial management staff; (iii) the development of a financial manual integrating
controls linked to operations; (iv) bi-annual supervision missions from the
subregional office; and (vi) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits
and independent external audits.

19. Flow of funds. Project funding will flow from the GAFSP account to IFAD and WFP
in accordance with their assigned roles and established legal agreements. For
IFAD-managed funds (GAFSP grant), the Ministry of Finance shall open a
designated account denominated in United States dollars in the Central Bank of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The designated account will be maintained and
managed by the Ministry of Finance. IFAD will advance funds to the designated
account in accordance with imprest account modalities.

20. The NPCO shall open and maintain a designated account denominated in Lao kips
(LAK) for project operations. The NPCO will submit replenishment requests to IFAD
through the Ministry of Finance with appropriate supporting documentation.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
through this project will be carried out in accordance with IFAD Procurement
Guidelines. For component 2, WFP’s procurement rules will apply. National
procurement procedures and regulations will be applied provided that they are
consistent with IFAD’s guidelines.

22. Governance. The NPCO will prepare a project framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement (whether carried out by the districts or by the NPCO) is carried out in
accordance with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the
publication of all procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business
partnership details in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices;
(ii) participation of end user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt
communication with bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of
conduct to be signed by all staff engaged in project implementation.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be jointly supervised by IFAD and WFP. WFP will focus on

component 2 while IFAD will supervise the remaining components and provide
overall financial management. A joint midterm review will be organized by the
government, IFAD and WFP before the end of 2018.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

6

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
24. The total cost for the project is estimated at US$38.8 million as indicated in Table 1.

Table 1
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government–
parallel

investment Private sector Beneficiaries Government Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 318 86.1 - - - - - - 51 13.9 370
2. Vehicles 1 089 100 - - - - - - - - 1 089
3. Equipment 477 100 - - - - - - - - 477
4. Agricultural inputs 865 58.9 73 5 - - - - - - 531 36.1 1 469
5. Matching grant 13 881 72.9 1 800 9.5 459 2.4 2 900 15.2 - - 19 040
6. National technical

assistance 2 176 47.2 1 775 38.5 - - - - - - 658 14.3 4 608
7. International technical

assistance 362 26.5 1 003 73.5 - - - - - - - - 1 364
8. Capacity-building and

learning 1 714 35.2 3 150 64.8 - - - - - - - - 4 864
9. Salaries and

allowances 1 292 42.0 - - - - -- - 1 787 58.0 3 078
10. Other operating costs 1 827 75.0 - - - - - - 609 25.0 2 435

Total 24 000 61.9 6 000 15.5 1 800 4.6 459 1.2 2 900 7.5 3 635 9.4 38 794

B. Project financing
25. The project will be financed by a GAFSP grant of US$30 million. The private sector

is expected to contribute US$459,000 and beneficiaries will provide US$2.9 million.
The Government’s contribution is estimated at US$5.4 million comprising taxes,
duties, infrastructure, land use registration and project management staff costs. Of
the total US$30 million in GAFSP funding, IFAD will manage US$24 million
(components 1 and 3) and WFP will manage US$6 million (component 2 and
technical assistance under component 1). See table 2 for costs by component and
financier.
Table 2
Project costs by component and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government
– parallel

investment
Private
sector Beneficiaries Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Strengthened public

services 3 285 1 003 -- -- - 265 4 552
2. Community-driven

agriculture-based
nutrition interventions - 4 997 - - - 444 5 441

3. Sustainable and
inclusive market-
driven partnerships 16 167 - 1 800 459 2 900 525 21 851

4. Project
management 4 548 - - - - 2 402 6 950

Total 24 000 6 000 1 800 459 2 900 3 635 38 794

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. The cost-benefit analysis of the project is based upon the connections among

nutrition, education and income. The analysis compares the discounted stream of
incremental expected lifetime income to the discounted stream of SSFSNP costs. It
is assumed that the project interventions will impact beneficiary children’s ability to
complete school and earn higher wages in their adult lives. The overall project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

7

economic rate of return is 8.7 per cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.92 indicates a
return of approximately US$3 for every US$1 invested. The sensitivity analysis
indicates a robust economic internal rate of return.

27. The project will target at least 400 villages – or 34,000 households. Assuming a
60 per cent success rate, the SSFSNP will lift approximately 20,400 households out
of poverty by project end. Direct benefits are expected to include diversification of
homestead food production, investments in agricultural production infrastructure,
and improved farming system productivity. These improvements will include: the
introduction of small and micro-irrigation; the introduction of forage and cash crops
into crop rotations; improved upland and lowland rice production; the introduction
of livestock enterprises such as fish and pigs; and expanded harvesting and
processing activities.

D. Sustainability
28. The project emphasizes capacity-building of public institutions from the village to

the national levels. This investment in public capacity will enable sustainable food
and nutrition security activities to remain embedded within the country’s civil
service and the society it serves. Once developed, public-sector capacity can be
expanded throughout the country as systems improve in the target provinces and
districts. The project will also emphasize the development of self-sustaining
community-based organizations and village users’ groups, which will play an
important role in the implementation and ongoing management of project activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The main risks to this project’s success are in the areas of institutions, markets and

policy. Institutional risks include the prolonged approval processes and weak
technical capacities of public agencies. Mitigation measures include the
establishment of clear criteria and formats for all planning processes, and the
rollout of annual capacity-assessment and capacity-development plans. Market
risks include volatile commodity prices and difficulties in forging public-private
partnerships because of the dispersed and small-scale nature of poor farmers’
production. To mitigate these risks, the project will promote diversified production
and the delivery of market information at the local level, and provide training for
communities and farmer groups in order to aggregate production and improve
quality. Policy risks include the limited application of national contract-farming
frameworks and limited awareness of climate-change policies. Mitigation comprises
continuous policy dialogue at the national and provincial levels, with an emphasis
on practical approaches for contract farming arrangements and climate-change
adaptation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
30. The project design is guided by the IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting,

gender, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management, and
private sector engagement. In terms of environmental impact, the majority of
activities fall under Category C, while a limited number are classified under
Category B. The project is also in line with the 2011-2015 COSOP for the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic.

B. Alignment and harmonization
31. As noted above, the SSFSNP will be fully aligned with government priorities and

GAFSP targets, and implemented in the context of IFAD’s COSOP for the country. In
addition, the project will be aligned with regional and national development projects
including: the Lao People's Democratic Republic – Upland Food Security
Improvement Project; the Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice; the
Poverty Reduction Fund Project and the Health Governance and Nutrition



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

8

Development Project, all supported by the World Bank; and the IFAD-supported
Food and Nutrition Security and Market Linkages Programme and Soum Son Seun
Jai Programme; the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)-supported
Project for Enhancing Capacity in PIP Management; the European Union-supported
Global Climate Change Alliance programme; WFP’s Mother and Child Health and
Nutrition project, and Food Assistance for Assets programme; and several NGO-led
initiatives.

C. Innovations and scaling up
32. The most important innovation promoted by the SSFSNP is the convergence

approach, which aims to consolidate the impacts of complementary government
and development partner-implemented programmes for improved nutrition. This
approach, which addresses all 22 interventions in the Government’s nutrition
strategy, can be replicated and scaled up throughout the country. Good practices
will be identified and shared within the SSFSNP and with other projects by
developing linguistically and culturally appropriate learning approaches that take
into account beneficiaries’ low literacy.

D. Policy engagement
33. IFAD is the co-chair on the Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Donor Group.

While the investment made through this project is unlikely to influence national
policy, IFAD’s collective project experience will form the basis for ongoing policy
engagement by the IFAD Country Office and the subregional hub. Focus areas of
policy dialogue will include participatory decentralized planning, public-private
partnership frameworks, contract farming and mainstreaming of nutrition into
agricultural production. The Sector Group is one important platform where these
issues will be raised.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A project financing agreement between the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

35. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in the
amount of twenty-four million United States dollars (US$24,000,000) upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




































President’s report on a proposed loan and
grant to the Lebanese Republic for
Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock
Production and Processing

Lebanese Republic

Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production and
Processing

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Lebanese Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$12.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$4.9 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.6 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary terms: 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate equal to
the reference interest rate per annum as
determined by the Fund semi-annually.

Amount of financing gap: Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced
Displacement and Rural Stability: US$5 million

Contribution of borrower: US$1.8 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.2 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Lebanese Republic for Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock
Production and Processing, as specified in paragraph 64.

Proposed loan and grant to the Lebanese Republic for
Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production
and Processing

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country rural development and poverty context
1. Real GDP growth in Lebanon for 2016 was estimated at 1.8 per cent, reflecting the

impact of regional turmoil.

2. According to the Ministry of Social Affairs and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Syrian refugees are concentrated in specific
pockets: 87 per cent of persons displaced from the Syrian Arab Republic and
67 per cent of the poorest Lebanese live in 251 out of a total of 1,653 cadastral
zones in the country.

3. Nearly 95 per cent of Syrian refugees are food insecure, 71 per cent are living
below the minimum poverty line of US$2.4 per day, and 41 per cent have
inadequate shelter.

4. Using these poverty lines, 28.6 per cent of Lebanese households were found to be
poor; and, of these, 8 per cent were considered extremely poor or below the lower
poverty threshold.

5. Currently, the Ministry of Social Affairs claims that the highest poverty rates are in
Mount Lebanon, North Lebanon and Bekaa; and these zones account for about
77 per cent of all poor people in the country. In 2014, 12 per cent of Lebanon's
population was estimated to be rural.

6. Compared to Lebanon's overall poverty rate of 8 per cent, over 20 per cent of
households engaged in agriculture are living below the low poverty threshold.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

7. The IFAD country strategy note for Lebanon (October 2016) identified the following
two strategic objectives (SOs) for IFAD’s short-term engagement: (i) SO1:
increase opportunities and improve living conditions for communities that depend
on dairy livestock, through improved production, capacity development, access to
veterinary services, and policy dialogue; and (ii) SO2: support rural enterprise
development for dairy processing through small and medium-sized enterprises and
community-based organizations, including cooperatives, producer associations and
private-sector entities.

8. On this basis, IFAD’s short-term engagement in Lebanon includes contributions
towards: (i) assisting the Government of Lebanon to strengthen the livestock
sector; (ii) supporting rural communities hosting Syrian refugees by promoting
initiatives that generate income and employment opportunities; and (iii) triggering
grant resources upon government request to urgently respond to the influx of
refugees into the region.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

2

9. The priorities of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) strategy match those of the IFAD
Strategic Framework 2016-2025, as well as IFAD’s strategic partnership with
Lebanon. Both frameworks relate to supporting smallholder agriculture and rural
development programmes, thus building the capacity, productivity and market
participation of poor rural people.

10. Theory of change. There is strong demand for good-quality dairy products
obtained through small-scale processing of fresh milk. Consumers are willing to pay
a premium price for quality. Small dairy producers are currently unable to
penetrate this rewarding market, however. Not only do they pay a high price for
animal feed, but they also produce and process low-quality milk and dairy
products. Reducing the cost of animal feed and improving animal health, together
with higher productivity per head and hygienic processing to add value to good-
quality raw milk, would sustainably increase incomes among smallholder dairy
producers and processors and enhance food security both at the household level
and countrywide. This would make the Lebanese dairy sector far more profitable at
the smallholder level and lift smallholder dairy farmers and processors out of
poverty. The same theory of change would apply to the Syrian refugees engaged in
dairy production and on-farm processing, whether now as refugees in Lebanon or
when they eventually return to the Syrian Arab Republic.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. The Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production and Processing (HALEPP)

project would be national in scope and cover seven governorates: Mount Lebanon,
North Lebanon, Akkar, Bekaa, Baalbek-Hermel, Nabatieh and South Lebanon. It
would mainly target the Lebanese communities who are among the poorest and the
most affected by the influx of Syrian refugees, as well as the refugees themselves,
by implementing its actions in the 251 poorest of a total of 1,653 cadastral zones
in the country. The 251 cadastral zones are home to 67 per cent of the poorest
Lebanese people and 87 per cent of the Syrian refugees.

12. The project would target about: (i) 2,400 smallholder cattle farmers and 1,600
small ruminant farmers. It is estimated that this would encompass nearly
30 per cent of all farmers owning up to seven cows, and 21 per cent of all small
ruminant farmers with herds of up to 200; (ii) 1,500 smallholder on-farm
processors, mostly women; (iii) 80 small-to-medium off-farm processors; and
(iv) 500 young Lebanese in host communities affected by the Syrian crisis, and
Syrian refugees, seeking employment in agriculture and agroprocessing and rural
infrastructure. All project interventions would have a strong focus on women, who
represent a specific IFAD target given their traditional importance in livestock
production, their growing social and economic responsibility, and their vulnerable
position in societies. Up to 30 per cent of the project target population would be
Syrian refugees.

B. Project development objective
13. The project’s overall goal is to contribute to the reduction of rural poverty among

resource-poor Lebanese rural households, including Lebanese host communities
affected by the Syrian crisis and the Syrian refugees living in these areas.

14. The development objectives are to: (i) increase the income of smallholder dairy
producers and processors; and (ii) increase employment opportunities for young
Lebanese in communities affected by the Syrian crisis and for young Syrian
refugees living in these communities.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project will have three core components that display a number of

complementarities between initiatives and subcomponents.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

3

16. Component 1: Enhancing the competitiveness of smallholder dairy
producers. The expected outcomes of this component are enhanced smallholder
dairy farming productivity and an increased supply of quality milk; this will be
achieved through outputs delivered under two activities:

(i) Improving the capacities of targeted smallholder dairy farmers; and

(ii) Improving animal management and productivity in cattle dairy herds and
small ruminant flocks.

17. Component 2: Improving small-scale value addition and market access.
The expected outcome of this component is better nutrition, resulting from higher
consumption of dairy products, better-quality dairy products at the household level,
strengthened and competitive small and mid-size dairy processors, and reduced
post-harvest milk losses. This will be achieved mainly by training producers and
processors in best practices. The outputs will be structured under three
subcomponents:

(i) Supporting aggregation and value addition. A training program will be
designed to raise awareness on issues of milk hygiene, handling and
processing, targeting women household members in charge of milking
animals and milk processing at home. The focus will be on the introduction
and use of simple innovations and technologies that result in higher yields
and better-quality products;

(ii) Improving access to finance. Subcomponent outcomes include increased
formal financial-sector lending to the smallholder dairy sector. The objective
of the subcomponent is to demonstrate the viability of sustainable inclusive
finance in the rural smallholder dairy market; and

(iii) Supporting a dairy stakeholder platform for inclusive policy dialogue.
This activity will have three main outcomes: [a] an inclusive national policy
dialogue platform is established/strengthened and plays an active advocacy
role on behalf of the smallholder dairy sector; [b] seven regional innovations
platforms are established, addressing technical constraints at the local level
and ensuring an upward flow of information; and [c] consensus based
self-regulation mechanisms (for quality, price, etc.) are established.

18. The third component involves project management and support.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. Based on previous and ongoing experience with the implementation of

IFAD-supported projects, and given the limited capacity in the MoA, HALEPP
implementation would combine making use of relevant MoA directorates and
outsourcing to qualified institutions (universities and international organizations,
NGOs and private service providers). The latters’ involvement would be arranged
through calls for proposals and performance-based memoranda of understanding.
Many NGOs have been active in supporting smallholder farmers and rural women in
technology transfer, agricultural extension and access to markets.

B. Organizational framework
20. A specially created project management unit (PMU) with competitively recruited

and qualified staff will coordinate the project. The PMU office will be physically
located in the MoA, reporting directly to the Office of the Minister. The PMU’s core
staff will include a full-time project director and full-time professional and support
staff to oversee the day-to-day operations of the project, namely: financial
manager, procurement officer, accountant, monitoring and knowledge management
and community mobilization-targeting/gender officer, administrative assistant, and
two drivers. In addition, the relevant staff from the Animal Resources Directorate



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

4

and Education and Extension Service will be involved in management of the project
part-time.

21. In line with the practice for IFAD-funded projects in Lebanon, a project steering
committee (PSC) will be set up to provide policy direction for the project; review
and approve annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs); and oversee the project
management team to ensure its effectiveness. Membership of the PSC will include:
representatives of MoA, the General Directorate of Cooperatives, Ministry of Social
Affairs, Office of the Ministry of State for Displaced Persons’ Affairs, microfinance
institutions, etc.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
22. A key planning instrument will be the AWP/B, the first of which will be prepared as

part of the final design report, together with the procurement plan for the first 18
months of the project; and it will be presented for discussion during the start-up
workshop for submission for IFAD’s no objection. The subsequent AWP/Bs should
be prepared, discussed and approved no later than sixty days before the fiscal
year-end. If required, the PMU, through the PSC, can propose adjustments in the
AWP/B during the relevant project year, which will become effective upon IFAD
clearance.

23. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system is designed to offer comprehensive
and reliable information to improve planning and decision-making for results-based
management. The monitoring and evaluation of HALEPP achievements and
knowledge management will be the responsibility of the PMU. An M&E specialist will
be responsible for collecting relevant data on activities, outputs and outcomes.

24. The logical framework will be used for results-based M&E and will include an initial
list of indicators to track progress and achievements. This will be done through
accounting for progress against AWP/B targets, routine and periodic assessments
of movement towards beneficiary impact. The project’s draft M&E matrix will be
prepared in a participatory manner as part of the start-up activities in line with the
logical framework. Several studies/surveys will be conducted as part of the M&E
system.

25. Baseline study. The project’s baseline is a critical element in its M&E system. It
will include the target group and a control group which will be essential for
attributing results to project activities. At the start of implementation, a baseline
survey will be conducted in selected locations to assess the physical and
socioeconomic status of the target group and define its benchmark status.

26. Midterm review. An external evaluation will be performed towards the middle of
the HALEPP implementation period, i.e. in year 3. It will assess operational aspects
such as project management and the implementation of activities, as well as the
extent to which the objectives are being fulfilled. It will also identify the corrective
actions needed for the project to achieve its impact.

27. Project completion survey (impact evaluation). This will include the same set
of questionnaires used for the baseline, to enable comparison against baseline
results. In addition, a panel of households will be interviewed to provide a thorough
analysis of the project’s impact. Analysis will also be conducted by type of
beneficiary, region and gender of household head.

28. The Results and Impact Management System (RIMS), developed by IFAD
since 2004, will be fully incorporated into the project’s M&E system. A systematic
methodology will be used, together with a set of common indicators across
programmes and regions, to measure and report on the performance and impact of
projects. The RIMS report for the level 1 and level 2 indicators will be prepared at
each fiscal year-end and reported to IFAD before 31 January.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

5

29. Georeferencing. All HALEPP activities will be georeferenced at the village level.
This will permit monitoring of the coverage of project actions and the concentration
of certain activities in specific areas. All extension sites, processing facilities
supported by HALEPP and microfinance institutions participating in the project will
be georeferenced.

30. Beneficiary database. The database will be developed for all project
beneficiaries. Details on each beneficiary to be contained in the database include:
physical address, national identification, age, sex, and activities participated in. The
database will make it possible to track beneficiaries and activities, and provide a
sampling vehicle for data collection and visits during supervision missions.

31. The learning process will be part of the regular M&E activities. Lessons learned will
be prepared and reported for all component activities. The learning and knowledge
management activities will include regular monitoring mechanisms, progress
reports, midterm review, and an impact assessment evaluation at the end of the
project. There will be a special focus on preparing a learning note on dairy
extension and dairy product labelling, which are innovations in the Lebanese
context.

32. As part of the preparation of the IFAD-required project completion report/impact
assessment during the final year of HALEPP implementation, the M&E data
collected over the implementation period will be used to make a thorough
assessment of its achievements. In particular, it will compare changes in the
livelihoods of beneficiaries, which are attributed to HALEPP, relative to the baseline
situation. Innovations and best practices at the village level will be documented for
future replication and scaling up.

33. The Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced Displacement and Rural Stability
(FARMS) specific results and achievements will be mainstreamed into IFAD's M&E
systems. The results achieved by the Facility will be reported as per current IFAD
reporting practice, coupled with a separate annual meeting on FARMS results and
progress to be organized for donors and key stakeholders. Knowledge management
and learning will aim to generate lessons learned and best practices, which can
feed back into the activities of the Facility and IFAD's broader portfolio.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
34. The PMU, under the MoA, will assume overall responsibility for managing the

projects' fiduciary performance and all financial management activities.

35. A financial management assessment has been made as part of the project design.
The country’s inherent risk is rated as high, as also is the project’s initial risk
rating. However, following implementation of the identified mitigation actions, the
risk rating is expected to drop to medium during the first or second year of
implementation.

36. The PMU will conduct a competitive selection process to hire a qualified finance
manager and a project accountant. The PMU will keep its accounts in accordance
with International Public-Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) cash-based
accounting. The project transactions will be recorded in an accounting software to
be procured as part of the project start-up and kept by the PMU.

37. As regards the flow of funds, government procedures will be applied to IFAD
funding in the same way as to other donors including the World Bank. Accordingly,
IFAD financing will be disbursed against duly certified withdrawal applications,
through the Borrower's treasury accounts to two separate designated accounts,
denominated in US dollars and held at the Central Bank of Lebanon. There will also
be a separate counterparty account for the government contribution. The Ministry
of Agriculture, through the PMU, will appoint an independent private audit firm,
acceptable to IFAD and under terms of reference cleared by it, to audit the project
in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and IFAD Guidelines for



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

6

Project Audits. An audited annual consolidated financial statement for the entire
project, together with a management letter setting out audit observations on
internal controls, will be submitted to the Fund within six months of the fiscal
year-end.

38. The assessment undertaken by IFAD showed that the Ministry is observing the
procurement rules and regulations currently applicable in the country. Nonetheless,
due to the aforementioned weaknesses in the current system, goods, works and
services procurement financed by the IFAD loan and grant and FARMS funds will
abide by IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. Any changes that may occur during
implementation will be agreed upon with IFAD.

39. Appropriate thresholds that can maximize procurement efficiency will be specified
in the letter to the borrower and in the approved procurement plan. Whenever
possible, goods and works procurement will be bulked into sizeable bid packages to
attract adequate competition, thus resulting in cost-effective and efficient
procurement. The procurement packages that are envisaged vary between low and
high value items with procedures to be implemented using international or
competitive bidding and a large number of requests for quotations.

40. As part of the PMU, a Procurement Officer will be recruited competitively and hired
on a performance-based contract. In order to establish a sound procurement
management system in the project, and given the current country experience,
intensive capacity development will be needed for PMU staff. Two Procurement
Assistants seconded by the Government will join the PMU during the first two years
of the project, to assist in the daily procurement activities which are expected to be
enormous, based on the initial 18-month procurement plan developed for the
project.

E. Supervision
41. IFAD will directly supervise the project at least once a year and focus on fiduciary

and implementation support functions in collaboration with the country programme
management team. A financial management specialist will participate in annual
missions to supervise and provide implementation support to the project and follow
up the identified risks and mitigation actions. In addition, and given the difficult
political situation currently prevailing, compounded by institutions with limited
capacity and the heavy presence of Syrian refugees, close technical supervision
and implementation support missions will be jointly carried out by IFAD and the
donor of the FARMS grant, at least once a year but also on demand.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
42. The total cost of the project, over a six-year period, is estimated at

US$12.5 million. All costs have been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing in
Lebanon in April 2017. The base cost amounts to US$11.8 million (90 per cent of
total costs). Investment costs represent 76 per cent of total costs and recurrent
costs 24 per cent. Physical and price contingencies account for about 9.5 per cent
of total costs.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

7

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Financing gap

FARMS Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Enhancing the
competitiveness of
smallholder dairy producers 1 800 30.8 - - 3 100 55.1 - - 800 14.1 5 700

2. Improving small-scale value
addition and market access 1 900 52.1 300 8.4 1 300 35.4 200 4.1 - - 3 700

3. Project management and
support 1 200 40.2 300 8.7 600 19.2 - - 1 000 31.9 3 000

Total 4 900 39.4 600 4.6 5 000 40.5 200 1.2 1 800 14.2 12 500

B. Project financing
43. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan of US$4.9 million (covering

39.4 per cent of total costs), an IFAD grant of US$600,000 (4.6 per cent). It is
anticipated that a FARMS grant of US$5 million (40.5. per cent) will also be
provided from supplementary funds. The Government will contribute US$1.8 million
(14.2 per cent) and beneficiaries US$200,000.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Financing gap

FARMS Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Vehicles 300 65.2 - - - - - 200 34.8 500
2. Equipment and

materials 700 28.8 - 1 500 64.8 200 6.4 - - 2 400
3. Technical

assistance 1 200 29.6 - 2 700 70.4 - - - - 3 900
5. Studies and

workshops 600 49.0 600 51.0 - - - - - - 1 100

6. Training 800 53.0 - 700 47.0 - - - - 1 600

7. Salaries 900 40.6 - - - - - 1 400 59.4 2 300

8. Incentives 200 100.0 - -- - - - - 200
9. Operation and

maintenance 300 53.4 - - - - 200 46.6 500

Total 4 900 39.4 600 4.6 5 000 40.5 200 1.2 1 800 14.2 12 500

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
44. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) on the investments made in the

HALEPP project area over a 15-year period is estimated at 15.6 per cent. The
project’s net present value (NPV) is positive (US$27.9 million) and the benefit-cost
ratio is 3.7. The economic analysis suggests that the HALEPP project is feasible.
With an opportunity cost of capital of 9 per cent, these indicators establish the
project’s economic feasibility. Profitability sensitivity tests suggest that the project
is robust and worthwhile.

45. Eleven models relating to dairy farming and support for dairy value-chain activity
models have been considered in the analysis. The livestock models included
encompass sheep, goat, and cow models, as well as models combining cattle and
small ruminants.

46. Eleven models reflecting different agroecological conditions in Lebanon are
analysed. Six models deal specifically with producers who pay a rent for accessing
rangelands and sell milk directly to Hallab (milk collectors) while four are
processing unit models.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

8

47. The models show an increase in net annual income per animal of around
50 per cent from production and processing. Good financial performances in terms
of financial internal rate of return (FIRR) and financial net present value (FNPV) are
achieved despite the relatively high cost of inputs, including the feed cost per
animal and labour costs.

48. The IRRs for the two small ruminant models are 14.7 per cent and 19.8 per cent
respectively; and the dairy processing models report an average FIRR of
15.2 per cent. Employment opportunities created in the livestock and processing
unit models show that around 12,600 jobs will be created with 85 per cent in the
livestock farming system (models M1 to M7), while 25 per cent will be created
through processing models (models M8 to 11).

49. Models M2, M3, M5, and M10 are the most influential models in HALEPP. Livestock
fertility and lactation are the most influential parameters in the project; and
greater attention should be paid to them to ensure its profitability.

D. Sustainability
50. The various vocational and extension training activities for dairy production and

processing and for other skill improvement will be designed to be relevant for
women, youth and smallholders for job creation, self-employment and upgrading
agriculture and dairy production and processing. All investments in dairy
processing will be based on a clear plan for their ownership, operation and
management.

51. The creation of a stakeholder platform with participation by smallholder dairy
producers and processors will provide a good opportunity for this group to voice
their concerns vis-à-vis the dairy industry and regulatory processes.

52. The project will seek to connect the target group to the formal financial sector for
dairy sector financing. A product will be developed and tested by three to five
competitively selected financial institutions, with technical support from the
project.

53. Project support to innovative renewable energy sources and dairy farm waste
treatment (biogas production) will contribute to lower production costs and
pollution abatement.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
54. The main risks include the possibility that Syrians may lose their refugee status

(which allows them to work in the agricultural sector) and “fall out” of ongoing
project activities; potential delays in project implementation, uncontrolled dairy
imports from the Syrian Arab Republic; a continuation of the influx of Syrian
refugees into rural communities thereby forcing up dairy product prices, leading to
unregulated importation of cheaper milk products; disease outbreaks
(foot-and-mouth disease and ovine rinderpest, etc.); and the effect of climate
change on natural resources.

55. HALEPP will adopt mitigation measures starting with policy dialogue with
government authorities to prevent beneficiaries from dropping out; avert delays in
project implementation and ensure intensive training for PMU staff and the use of
NGOs and service providers. The project will assist the Government of Lebanon to
improve rural infrastructure and increase milk productivity. The project will partner
with international and national institutions and NGOs to leverage support for the
communities hosting Syrian refugees and control the unregulated importation of
cheaper milk products. The project will support the MoA's initiative to ensure
regular frequency in the organization of fora for smallholder farmers and
small-scale processors, and facilitate participation by targeted stakeholders. The
project will assist in building national capacity to mitigate disease risks. The project
will educate participating dairy farmers on forage conservation techniques, as well



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

9

as investment in pasture improvement and conservation at farm level. The project
is expected to promote investments in climate-resilient and low-carbon
post-harvesting procedures, drying/cooling, processing and value addition, to
reduce product losses and increase incomes among farmers and rural laborers.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
56. The project is aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025, the country

strategic note for Lebanon, and IFAD policies. The project’s activities,
implementation arrangements and M&E system have been designed in compliance
with the IFAD Targeting Policy and IFAD Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment; and they are aligned with the approaches outlined in the
Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in IFAD’s operations. The project is designed
to be consistent with IFAD’s Private Sector Development and Partnership Strategy,
its Rural Finance Policy and the associated Decision Tools for Rural Finance. The
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) report
confirmed the project’s environmental and social classification as B; and it rated
climate risk as “Moderate”, given that the project approach will promote the use of
climate-resilient technologies (e.g. solar energy and biogas technologies), along
with improved management of animal husbandry and dairy processing. Last but
not least, the HALEPP project is fully aligned to the FARMS policy.

B. Alignment and harmonization
57. HALEPP is consistent with the Government’s 2015–2019 agricultural development

strategy (ADS), the National Poverty Targeting Programme (2011) (NPTP) and the
Lebanon Crisis Response Plan (LCRP). The ADS aims to develop institutional
capacities and increase MoA preparedness to meet agricultural-sector challenges
through partnerships and collaboration between relevant stakeholders. It defines
eight courses of action: improve food safety and enhance the quality of locally
produced and imported products; increase the productivity and competitiveness of
Lebanese agricultural products; improve governance and the sustainable use of
resources; strengthen agricultural extension and education; strengthen agricultural
research and laboratories; develop the cooperative sector and mutual funds;
develop MoA capacities; and mitigate the impacts of climate change. The strategy
identifies several targets, including: increasing the share of agriculture to 6 per
cent of GDP from the existing 4 per cent; reducing the current agriculture trade
deficit by 15 percentage points; raising the value of agricultural production by
30 percentage points: in addition to increasing public spending in the sector,
raising farming household incomes and creating jobs in agriculture.

58. The development objective of the NPTP for Lebanon is to expand the coverage and
enhance the NPTP social assistance package for Lebanese people affected by the
Syrian crisis and all Lebanese households living below the extreme poverty line.
Actions in the LCRP are aligned to national policies and strategies, and seek to
complement and build on other international assistance in the country. The LCRP is
organized around seven strategic sectors, including one on food security. The MoA
leads the food security sector along with the Food and Agriculture Organization and
the World Food Programme.

C. Innovations and scaling up
59. To assist the target group in reducing energy costs and explore opportunities for

private-sector engagement in renewable energy, the project will support three pilot
models using renewable energy in the dairy sector, for later scaling up:
(i) solar-powered on-farm milk cooling technology; (ii) solar-powered water
heating for milk processing; and (iii) biogas production from dairy cattle dung.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

10

D. Policy engagement
60. The project will have three main outcomes in terms of policy dialogue and

engagement: (i) an inclusive national policy dialogue platform is
established/strengthened and plays an active advocacy role on behalf of the
smallholder dairy sector; (ii) seven regional innovation platforms are set up, to
address technical constraints at the local level and ensure an upward flow of
information; and (iii) consensus-based self-regulation mechanisms (for quality,
price, etc.) are established.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
61. A project financing agreement between the Lebanese Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

62. The Lebanese Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

63. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
64. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Lebanese Republic in an amount equivalent to four million nine hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$4,900,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Lebanese
Republic in an amount equivalent to six hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$600,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President
















































President’s report

Proposed Loan and Grant to the
Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the
Western States Agribusiness Project


Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Western States Agribusiness Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation

Total project cost: US$20.26 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$8.98 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a 10-year
grace period and a service charge of three quarters
of one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Amount of IFAD grant: US$3.98 million

Financing gap

Cofinancier(s):

US$4.47 million

Implementing partners

Amount of cofinancing: US$1.05 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$0.99 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.78 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Western States Agribusiness
Project, as contained in paragraph 54.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the Union of
Myanmar for the Western States Agribusiness Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context

1. Emerging from 50 years of isolation, Myanmar has embarked on a comprehensive
path of political and economic reforms since 2011. These aim to introduce elements
of popular representation into the political sphere, foster economic growth and
inclusive social development, improve the business environment, attract foreign
investment and reduce poverty.

2. Myanmar’s population was estimated at 53.9 million in 2015, of which some
66 per cent is rural. Myanmar is ethnically diverse, with eight major ethnic groups
and 135 subgroups.

3. Despite being resource-rich, Myanmar is one of the poorest nations in South-East
Asia. An estimated one third of the population were living below the poverty line in
2005, but this proportion had dropped to one fourth by 2014. The 2015 Human
Development Report ranked the country 148th among the 188 nations rated, with a
human development index of 0.536. Myanmar’s per capita gross national income
was estimated at US$1,160 in 2015. The annual growth rate of gross domestic
product accelerated from 4.8 per cent in 2011 to 7.2 per cent in 2015, while
inflation was reported at 8.4 per cent at the end of that year.

4. The agriculture sector is the core of the economy, generating 37 per cent of GDP
and employing about 70 per cent of the working population in 2015. There is a
strong association between agriculture and poverty; and there is significantly
greater poverty in rural areas. The incidence of poverty is also higher among ethnic
groups compared to the majority population.

5. Disparities exist among and within states and within communities. Rural poverty is
largely a function of poor resource endowments. The rural poor are typically
landless people and small and marginal farmers, usually owning between less than
one and five acres of land. They lack access to adequate food and to essential non-
food items and services. Many of the poorest live in isolated hill tracts and upland
areas of ethnic states, which were previously ravaged by decades of civil conflict
that left them isolated and without development investment.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. IFAD’s strategy in Myanmar is to support the Government in creating a model for
agricultural modernization and rural transformation in each agroecological zone of
the country. The first investment – the Fostering Agricultural Revitalization in
Myanmar (FARM project) – created the model for agricultural development, service
delivery and enterprise growth in the central dry zone. This model is now being
scaled up by development partners and the Government across the entire dry zone.
The second investment – the Eastern States Agribusiness Project – establishes the



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

2

model for agribusiness development and community agroforestry, and will create
farming and employment opportunities across the eastern hilly zone for ethnic
groups, indigenous people, ex-combatants, and returning migrants. The third
investment – the Western States Agribusiness Project – to be financed under the
2016-2018 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle – creates the model
for climate-resilient agricultural transformation from subsistence to commercial
livelihoods, to be implemented across the western upland areas and forests. With
these projects, IFAD is fulfilling its strategic objective of helping the Government
create optimal models for modernizing agriculture across agroecological zones, with
a strong focus on the ethnic states.

7. The project’s rationale is anchored in the Government’s policies to reduce economic
and social disparities in rural areas. It is consistent with the National
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Framework for Economic and Social
Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural Development Action Plan. The
project’s rationale has four dimensions: (i) to provide a systemic structural
response to the challenges of, and opportunities for, rural transformation in
southern Chin and northern Magway; (ii) to create a model for the environmentally
sustainable modernization of agriculture in degraded sloping areas, which generates
economic benefits for poor households; (iii) to rehabilitate productive infrastructure
in ways that optimize sustainable use of the natural resource base; and (iv) to
forge pathways for communities to transition from subsistence to commercial
livelihoods through better access to inputs, knowledge and services. Activities for
livelihood-support and nutrition-sensitive agriculture have also been included, to
address important needs among local communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project is located in southern Chin State and the northern Magway Region,

which share a common river basin. These areas have among the highest
concentrations of poverty in Myanmar. Chin State is located in the hilly western
border area. Its people belong to the Chin ethnic group and its 53 officially
recognized subgroups. Southern Chin is home to some of the most remote and
isolated communities in the country. Magway Region is situated in the central dry
zone, and its population is mostly of the Bamar ethnic group. The region is poor
and food-insecure, and has suffered a series of natural calamities and major
harvest losses in recent years.

9. The project’s target groups consist of: (i) small and medium-scale farming
households in upland and lowland areas; (ii) livestock producers; and
(iii) non-farming and landless households. Women and women-led households will
be prioritized; and youth, as the primary agents of change at the community level,
will be the focus of activities involving technological innovation and
commercialization.

B. Project development objective
10. The project’s goal is to improve the social and economic status of rural households

in a climate-resilient manner in the northern Magway Region and southern
Chin State. Its objective is to increase household incomes and enhance food
security and nutrition quality. Its investments focus on commodities and services
that have comparative advantage, market demand and growth potential.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project’s two expected outcomes are: (i) access to productive and social

infrastructure is improved; and (ii) technological, financial and policy environment
for small farmers and agribusinesses is enhanced.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

3

12. Component 1: Infrastructure. The project will finance strategic investments in
productive and social infrastructure.

13. Subcomponent 1.1: Productive infrastructure. The project will finance:
(i) rehabilitation of irrigation schemes to ensure an adequate and reliable supply of
water to farms; (ii) rural access roads linking farms to markets; (iii) irrigation
technology for home gardens to ensure food security and nutritional diversity; and,
(iv) land consolidation on a pilot basis. These investments will generate
opportunities for increased incomes, reduce on-farm and off-farm production costs,
and improve food security for communities and households. They will also improve
water management, reduce water conveyance and application losses by
30-40 per cent, improve drainage and reduce siltation, and conserve groundwater.

14. Subcomponent 1.2: Social infrastructure. The project will invest in social
infrastructure facilities mainly at the household level, particularly targeting the
needs of women and the poorest households. Domestic water supply, rainwater
harvesting, and renewable energy solutions will be eligible for support. Scheme
selection will be participatory, sensitive to cultural considerations, and subject to
social, technical, financial and environmental feasibility. The ownership,
management, operation and maintenance of all facilities constructed will be
optimized to ensure sustainability.

15. Subcomponent 1.3: Capacity-building. The project will build capacities in the
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department and the Department of
Rural Development of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation (MoALI) –
responsible for productive and social infrastructure respectively. This will be done
through the provision of technical assistance; strengthening of staffing and office
facilities; awareness of water, sanitation and hygiene issues; awareness of
nutritional diversity; and capacity development for social mobilization.

16. Component 2: Services. The project will invest in agricultural modernization and
enabling services to optimize resource management, productivity and benefits in
areas of infrastructure investment.

17. Subcomponent 2.1: Agricultural modernization. The project will invest in a
range of agriculture, livestock and technical services to modernize production and
trigger improvements in food security and nutrition, livelihoods, and economic
returns. Services delivered to farming households will include land titling,
technology transfer, skill development, access to inputs and supplies, access to
markets and information, contractual linkages, and access to financial resources.
Climate-resilient sloping agricultural land technology will be promoted. Services
delivered to the landless will focus on technical and business management skills,
microenterprise development and private-sector linkages.

18. Subcomponent 2.2: Financial services. Building on FARM experiences, the
project will support financial inclusion for small farmers, livestock owners and the
landless, ensuring equal access for ethnic groups and women. It will invest in:
(i) savings and credit groups, promoting financial literacy; (ii) a rural business fund
to support microenterprises; (iii) an agribusiness fund to help agribusinesses set up
processing facilities in the project area; and (iv) a line of credit to refinance project-
related agriculture, livestock and enterprise-lending operations by licensed financial
institutions.

19. Subcomponent 2.3: Policy engagement. The project will contribute to an
inclusive and evidence-based policy framework for rural development in Myanmar,
specifically related to the project’s implementation experiences. It will focus on:
(i) transition from shifting to sedentary agriculture and associated customary land
laws; (ii) re-categorization of high-value commercial crops from non-timber forest
products to agricultural or industrial crops; and (iii) agricultural service delivery and
market linkages.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

4

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. Based on an institutional assessment at the state level, experience in similar
contexts and the country strategy, the project’s implementation approach is to:
(i) strengthen MoALI and other relevant agencies at the state level, and increase
their responsibilities for implementing activities in a sequenced manner; (ii) engage
with reputable implementing partners to serve as lead technical agencies and to
gradually devolve responsibilities to public agencies as their capacities mature;
(iii) establish small state-level project implementation offices (PIOs) for
coordinating implementation at state level and for monitoring and reporting on
progress ; and (iv) establish a project management unit (PMU) in the Department
of Rural Development (DRD) that will be integrated within DRD structures. The PMU
will be responsible for project implementation, fiduciary management, work
planning and budgeting, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and policy interface
functions. It will manage contracts with implementing partners and public and
private entities.

B. Organizational framework
21. MoALI, in its capacity as lead project agency, will be responsible and accountable

for the project. The DRD of MoALI will be the project's focal department. The
Ministry of Planning and Finance will enter into subsidiary financing agreements
(SFA) with selected licensed financial institutions for administration of the credit
line.

22. The project will be governed by a National Project Steering Committee and two
project coordination committees (one in each location). It will be managed by the
central PMU established within DRD and the two decentralized PIOs (one in each
location).

23. The project will be executed by implementing partners, MoALI at the state level,
and the private sector. They will lead social mobilization, community interfacing and
policy engagement. Infrastructure will be implemented by the Irrigation and Water
Utilization Management Department (IWUMD) and DRD, in collaboration with
private-sector engineering firms and contractors, as required. Agricultural
modernization will be implemented by MoALI knowledge centres (KCs), brokering
services and markets for the target groups, in collaboration with producer
associations and community organizations. Financial services will be provided by
licensed financial institutions.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Planning. The annual work plan and budget will be the key management tool for
planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. It will be
based on project design, cost tables and the implementation manual; and it will be
informed by operational experiences and challenges. The logical framework will
constitute the main reference for framing annual work plan and budgets, to create
clear linkages among proposed activities, budget requirements and expected
outputs, outcomes and impacts. A participatory planning approach will be applied,
to ensure that project investments reflect the target groups’ needs and aspirations.

25. Monitoring and evaluation. The project’s M&E system will be designed to provide
reliable information to facilitate results-based management. It will be aligned with
the M&E system developed under the FARM, and will help strengthen MoALI’s
system for monitoring the effectiveness of official development assistance. The M&E
system will have a three-tier structure: (i) output monitoring, focusing on physical
and financial inputs, activities and outputs; (ii) outcome monitoring, focusing on the
use of outputs and measurement of benefits at the household and community



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

5

levels; and (iii) impact assessment, evaluating impacts against objectives. All M&E
data, analysis, and reporting will be disaggregated by poverty status, gender, and
ethnicity.

26. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s learning system will be
structured at the state, region and central levels. It will capture information on
progress, lessons and solutions to implementation constraints. A consolidated
annual project review will be performed towards the end of each fiscal year, to
assess physical and financial progress against the targets and towards the
objectives.

27. Knowledge management will be a systematic feature throughout the project. To
enable effective knowledge management and sharing, results and lessons from the
project will be systematically documented through specific studies and knowledge
products commissioned by the PMU and/or the PIOs. The M&E system will be a key
knowledge source. Innovations observed during implementation will be documented
for possible scaling up. The MoALI and PMU will be responsible for sharing
knowledge documents through dedicated websites, workshops and seminars.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. As fiduciary risks are high in Myanmar, the project will apply a number of mitigating

measures: (i) financial reporting based on automated systems; (ii) competitive
recruitment of qualified staff; (iii) use of a financial management manual
integrating controls with operations; (iv) technical assistance and external
oversight; (v) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits and
independent external audits; and (vi) a good governance framework to ensure
accountability and transparency.

29. Financial management. The PMU will be responsible for all aspects of project
financial management, including budgeting, financial statements and reporting,
withdrawal applications for IFAD disbursements, and the coordination of audit
processes.

30. Flow of funds. Designated accounts in United States dollars will be opened for the
IFAD loan and the IFAD grant, and will be operated using the imprest method. Bank
accounts denominated in local currency will be opened at the PMU level, with
signatories at appropriate level for operational efficiency.

31. Financial reporting. The PMU will maintain separate accounts for the project, in
accordance with the cash basis of accounting. The financial statements prepared for
the project will be supplemented with additional data as necessary, so as to provide
minimum disclosures under international accounting standards.

32. Project expenditure will be recorded using the accounting software currently used
by the PMU of another ongoing project in MoALI. Further customization is foreseen
to enhance the software’s reporting capability.

33. Taxes. IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, adopted
in 2009 and amended in 2014, allow IFAD financing to be used to pay taxes. The
payment of taxes with IFAD funding is foreseen for the project. The Ministry of
Planning and Finance has formally requested IFAD to cover taxes on the basis that
tax exemption is impractical and the tax burden is low.

34. Audit. The project will be audited by the Office of the Auditor General of the Union
(OAG), which has adopted INTOSAI audit standards. OAG conducts mostly financial
audits, with some procurement and performance audits.

35. Procurement. IFAD procurement guidelines will apply to the project. The
programme implementation manual will specify detailed procurement requirements
and procedures. The procurement methods, prior review arrangements, cost and
time estimates, and risk mitigation measures will be defined in the Letter to the



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

6

Borrower and reflected in the procurement plan. Technical assistance will be
provided to develop PMU and PIO procurement capacities.

E. Supervision
36. The project will be supervised by IFAD. A supervision and implementation support

mission will be undertaken annually; and MoALI offices at the central, state and
regional levels will participate in these missions. A midterm review mission will be
undertaken jointly by IFAD and the Government at the end of the third year of
implementation, to assess the progress, achievements, constraints, emerging
impact and likely sustainability of project activities, and to make recommendations
and any adjustments for the remaining project period.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
37. The total project cost, including duties, taxes and contingencies, is estimated at

US$20.26 million over a six-year implementation period. Indicative costs for each
component are detailed in table 1. Indicative costs by expenditure categories are
provided in table 2.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Implementing

partners Financing gap
Beneficiaries/
private sector

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Infrastructure 4 065 58.6 1 124 16.2 963 13.9 780 11.2 6 932
1.1 Productive
infrastructure 3 573 83.2 278 6.5 117 2.7 327 7.6 4 294
1.2 Social
infrastructure 146 9.1 627 39.0 383 23.8 453 28.1 1 610
1.3 Capacity-building 346 33.7 219 21.3 463 45.0 1 028

2. Services 3 938 32.4 2 854 23.5 1 050 8.6 3 509 28.9 796 6.6 12 146
2.1 Agricultural
modernization 1 148 12.4 2 854 30.8 1 050 11.3 3 427 37.0 796 8.6 9 275
2.2 Financial services 2 708 100.0 2 708
2.3 Policy engagement 81 50.0 81 50.0 163

3. Project management 981 83.2 198 16.8 1 179
Total 8 984 44.4 3 978 19.6 1 050 5.2 4 471 22.1 780 3.8 994 4.9 20 257

B. Project financing
38. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan of US$8.98 million, an IFAD grant of

US$3.98 million, a government contribution of US$0.99 million, a
beneficiary/private-sector contribution of US$0.78 million, and implementing
partners’ cost-sharing of US$1.05 million. The financing gap of US 4.47 million may
be sourced through cofinancing identified during implementation or through a
subsequent PBAS cycle.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Implementing

partners Financing gap
Beneficiaries/
private sector

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Civil works 3 256 91.9 44 1.2 117 3.3 127 3.6 3 554
2. Vehicles 255 100 255
3. Equipment 24 100 24
4. Consulting

services 633 21.2 1 489 52.5 861 30.3 2 984
5. Training 661 38.0 303 17.4 777 44.6 1 741
6. Goods,

services
and inputs 1 615 23.0 2 141 30.5 1 050 15.0 1 528 21.8 652 9.3 29 0.4 7 015

7. Credit 2 276 100 2 276
8. Salaries

and
allowances 152 8.6 1 189 67.7 416 23.7 1 757

9. Operating
costs 104 15.9 549 84.1 652

Total 8 984 44.4 3 978 19.6 1 050 5.2 4 471 22.1 780 3.8 994 4.9 20 257
*

Disbursement categories will be specified in schedule 2 of the negotiated financing agreement. A maximum of six disbursement categories is
envisaged to allow sufficient flexibility during implementation.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. The project is expected to directly benefit 76,810 households, of which 10,190 in

Chin and 66,620 in Magway, encompassing a total of 390,410 rural women and
men. Many additional households will indirectly benefit from project activities. The
estimated project cost per beneficiary household is US$327.

40. Project benefits will be generated from improved infrastructure, land tenure,
agricultural technology, market access, enterprise growth and financial services.
The main beneficiaries will be small farming households, landless/tenant
households, and off-farm households. The key results will be higher incomes,
additional jobs, better food security and nutrition, and secured climate resilience.

41. The project’s economic internal rate of return over 20 years is estimated at
32 per cent.

D. Sustainability
42. The sustainability of project investments is based on the underlying business

relationships that the project will generate between small farmers and markets, and
between enterprises and markets. Global development experiences have shown
that profitable business relationships are an optimal instrument for making
investments sustainable and for breaking the cycle of dependency and poverty.

43. Project sustainability is also based on: (i) access to knowledge: KCs will be low-cost
facilities that will eventually operate on a cost recovery basis; (ii) access to
markets: upgraded commodity chains, contract farming and outgrower schemes
will ensure smallholder access to markets; (iii) access to land: the project will
invest in securing land tenure and ownership, particularly in Chin State; (iv) access
to water: irrigation and drainage improvement, combined with participatory water
management, will improve water distribution and operation and maintenance;
(v) access to basic needs: social infrastructure will cover underlying needs related
to food security, nutrition, and domestic water supply; (vi) access to finance:
financial inclusion activities will link smallholders and landless microentrepreneurs
to the formal financial sector; and (vii) access to extension: use of MoALI extension
officers as KC managers trained by the project will ensure continuity in service
delivery.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

8

44. Exit strategy. The project’s exit strategy is to strengthen public institutions at the
central and state levels, to rely on a range of institutional service providers for
implementation, to foster profitable business relationships among producers and
markets, and to improve the capabilities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
45. The project’s main risks are in the governance, expropriation, fiduciary and capacity

areas. They will be mitigated by a robust project governance framework, a set of
legal assurances to be negotiated with the Government, substantial technical
assistance and capacity-building, and the underlying business relationships to be
fostered.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. The project’s goal and objectives are aligned with the Strategic Framework
2016-2025 in terms of market-driven smallholder development and rural business
growth. It is compliant with all relevant IFAD policies, strategies and guidelines,
and in particular with the Fund’s policies on targeting, rural finance, land tenure,
Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, and Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment, as well as with the partnership and climate change strategies, and
the Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
47. The project’s rationale is anchored in IFAD’s poverty reduction mandate and the

Government’s policy for reducing economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with Myanmar’s National Comprehensive Development Plan, the
Framework for Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development Action Plan. It is closely coordinated with the emerging agriculture
sector investments of multilateral and bilateral development partners, and with the
Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Working Group.

Innovations and scaling upC.
48. Innovation. The project is the first substantial investment in Myanmar’s western

states to address the climate change challenges posed by erratic rainfall, intra- and
inter-annual drought, and record high temperatures that are undermining farm
productivity and the livelihood options of the rural poor. It introduces several
innovations in its model for climate-smart agricultural development in the
upland/lowland areas of the western states. Key innovations in the Myanmar
context include: (i) introduction of sloping agricultural land technology;
(ii) promotion of climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies;
(iii) livelihood diversification, with potential for greater value-added; (iv) promotion
of smallholder-driven small businesses and microenterprises; and (v) support for
adapted rural finance products and services.

49. Scaling up potential. Given the transient nature of the current agriculture sector
regulatory framework in Myanmar, particularly in view of the major political
changes that occurred in 2015, there is an important window of opportunity for
scaling up the methodologies and results pioneered by IFAD-financed operations in
Myanmar. The country programme is engaging in this in two ways: (i) successful
service delivery models are already being replicated and brought to scale in other
parts of the country by the Government, partners, and the private sector; and
(ii) policy engagement opens avenues for scaling up investments based on
implementation experiences, the fostering of stakeholder alliances to capture policy
proposals, capacity-building for policy development, and the promotion of policy
advocacy within national processes.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

9

Policy engagementD.
50. The project will contribute to an inclusive and evidence-based policy framework for

rural development in Myanmar, specifically related to the project’s implementation
experiences. It will support formulation of the policies and regulations needed to
enhance and sustain project investments, and to contribute to the ongoing policy
discussions on broader agricultural modernization and rural transformation. Policy
engagement will also aim at scaling up successful approaches in other states and
regions of the country, and will contribute to the project’s exit strategy.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
51. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

52. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

53. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
54. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to eight million
nine hundred and eighty four thousand United States dollars (US$8,984,000)
and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance
with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to three million nine hundred
and seventy eight  thousand United States dollars (US$3,978,000) and upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Kingdom of Bhutan for the
Commercial Agriculture and Resilient
Livelihoods Enhancement Programme


Kingdom of Bhutan

Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods
Enhancement Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Kingdom of Bhutan

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forests

Total programme cost: US$31.59 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 5.89 million (equivalent to approximately
US$8.27 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.76 million (equivalent to approximately
US$1.06 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.58 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.02 million)

Financing gap:1 US$6 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier: Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd. (FCBL)

Amount of cofinancing: US$4.81 million

Contribution of borrower: US$5.77 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.66 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021
performance-based allocation system (PBAS) allocation or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Kingdom of Bhutan for the Commercial Agriculture and Resilient
Livelihoods Enhancement Programme, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of Bhutan for
the Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods
Enhancement Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Located on the southern slopes of the Eastern Himalayas, Bhutan is mostly

mountainous and heavily forested, with 70 per cent of its geographical area
covered in forests, 10 per cent with shrubs and only 3 per cent cultivated.
Elevations range from 160 to 7,000 metres above sea level, with 31 per cent of the
agricultural land on steep slopes – greater than 50 degrees.

2. Bhutan’s economy has experienced growth averaging 7 per cent per year, with
GDP per capita increasing from US$1,387 in 2006 to US$2,363 in 2013, and
poverty declining from 23 per cent in 2007 to 12 per cent in 2012. While
approximately 62 per cent of the population depends on agriculture (mostly
subsistence farming) for their livelihoods (95 per cent of the rural poor are
employed in agriculture), the share of agriculture in real GDP declined by more than
half, from 25 per cent in 2002 to 12 per cent in 2012. The share of spending on
agriculture also declined from 22.5 per cent in 1982 to 9.8 per cent in 2013.

3. Poverty in Bhutan is a distinctly rural phenomenon. Poverty also varies by region,
with the eastern parts of Bhutan significantly poorer than the rest of the country.
Many villages are still isolated: those with limited roads and market access tend to
have higher poverty rates. Lack of access to technology, business development
services, fair markets and suitable financial products constrain rural enterprise.

4. The challenges affecting agricultural production include natural disasters, declining
productivity, human-wildlife conflict, a shortage of farm labour, insufficient
irrigation and limited post-harvest management.

5. In addition, climate change is projected to have a major impact on agricultural
productivity as a result of changes in water availability, soil fertility and incidence of
pests and disease. Considering that the nation’s socio-economic well-being depends
largely on agriculture, water resources and forests, the impacts of climate change
have the potential to undermine development efforts.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP)

6. Bhutan’s Government has accorded highest priority to agricultural development in
its Eleventh Five Year Plan (2013-2018) in order to: (i) stimulate climate-resilient
production; (ii) build value chain systems for vegetables and dairy, and a
comprehensive marketing system to enhance the commercial viability of other
agricultural products; and (iii) facilitate institutional linkages and policy dialogue
towards the commercialization of agriculture.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

2

7. The programme is therefore designed in alignment with the Eleventh Five Year Plan
as a strategic value chain programme with focused product interventions, taking
into consideration the Government’s priorities and gaps left by previous projects.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
8. The programme will initially be implemented in the six poorest eastern districts of

Lhuentse, Mongar, Pemagatshel, Samdrup Jongkhar, Trashigang and
Trashiyangtse. Upon midterm review, it will be scaled up to include districts in
central and south-western Bhutan.

9. The programme will follow an inclusive approach to reach all households living in
target communities. It will involve 21,860 households in six districts in establishing
sustainable agriculture production and an additional 7,115 households in building
vegetable and dairy value chains. Within the target districts, the programme will
work in areas that have been identified based upon: (i) demonstrated production
potential in select commodities; (ii) relative accessibility to roads and marketing
channels; and (iii) demonstrated interest and commitment of communities and
farmers’ organizations. Targeting will also focus on the inclusion of women and
youth.

B. Programme development objective
10. The goal of the programme is to sustainably increase smallholder producers’

incomes and reduce poverty through commercialization of production by
programme households. The objective is increased returns to smallholder farmers
through climate-resilient production of crops and livestock products in nationally
organized value chains and marketing systems. The goal and objective are both in
line with Bhutan’s poverty strategy.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The programme’s three main components are: (i) market-led sustainable

agricultural production; (ii) value chain development and marketing; and
(iii) institutional support and policy development. There will also be a management
component.

12. Component 1: Market–led sustainable agricultural production. This
component aims to bring about a sustainable increase in agricultural production by
rural households and enhance the resilience of agricultural production systems to
climate-induced shocks. It consists of three subcomponents:

(i) Increased production resilience and diversification in agriculture. This
subcomponent will promote integrated agricultural production and
management through: (a) strengthening existing farmers’ groups and
establishing new groups; (b) strengthening extension services, including the
lead farmers outreach model, and increasing their reach; (c) supporting
agricultural inputs, including seeds and seedlings; (d) developing efficient
irrigation; (e) promoting agricultural system innovations; and (f) piloting an
initiative on strengthening local institutions for increased climate resilience.

(ii) Intensification and expansion of vegetable production. In order to
ensure an adequate volume of acceptable quality produce and planned and
timely production, the programme aims to: (a) expand and intensify
vegetable production by rural households; (b) strengthen existing vegetable
producers’ groups and promote new groups; (c) provide vegetable production
inputs; and (d) promote vegetable seed research.

(iii) Intensification and expansion of dairy production. To ensure that an
adequate volume of high-quality milk is produced by smallholder dairy
farmers, the programme will: (a) strengthen existing smallholder dairy farmer



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

3

groups and establish new groups; (b) improve outreach services for livestock;
(c) support fodder and feed production; (d) provide dairy production inputs;
and (e) install bio-gas units.

13. Component 2: Value chain development and marketing. By building value
chains and marketing systems for vegetable and dairy products, the programme
will increase the incomes of smallholder farmers through their participation in
commercial farm production through three subcomponents:

(i) Development of resilient vegetable and dairy value chains. The
programme will support the design and implementation of vegetable and dairy
value chains, increasing climate resilience and strengthening the capacity of
the Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd. (FCBL) for value chain development and
business plan design and implementation.

(ii) Strengthening agricultural commercialization and enterprise
development. Support will be provided for: (a) agriculture enterprise
development; (b) facilitating access to finance, including a social inclusion
fund and production support fund; and (c) development of multi-stakeholder
platforms and networks.

(iii) Development of community-driven market infrastructure. The
programme will support the creation of value chain infrastructure at the local
level, with ownership and management by communities, farmers’ groups,
cooperatives and small-scale entrepreneurs. Support will include the design
and construction of necessary infrastructure and equipment for vegetable and
dairy value chains.

14. Component 3: Institutional support and policy development. This component
aims to build an institutional and policy environment that fosters the collaboration
necessary for climate-resilient, market-led production and value chain development
in the renewable natural resources (RNR) sector for addressing structural
development constraints. The subcomponents include:

(i) Strengthened value chain and marketing knowledge and
communication. The programme will capture and document knowledge and
best practices from programme implementation, especially related to climate
resilience and value chain and market development by: (a) strengthening
market information systems; and (b) developing a curriculum for RNR training
institutes.

(ii) Mainstreaming climate change resilience and value chain lessons into
agricultural policies and sector strategies. This subcomponent will
involve: (a) participatory policy development and monitoring; (b) support to
Bhutan’s Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (MoAF) in mainstreaming
agricultural policy; and (c) developing a regulatory framework that is
conducive to private-sector development and public-private partnership (PPP).

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

15. The programme will be implemented over seven years, from 2015-2022. It will
adopt a flexible, non-prescriptive, process-oriented approach that enables
stakeholders to determine the scope of activities aimed at agricultural and livestock
diversification for climate-resilient livelihoods. Vegetable and dairy intensification
activities will follow a more selective approach to value chain and marketing
development.

Organizational frameworkB.
16. Programme implementation responsibility. MoAF will be the lead agency, with

overall responsibility for the programme and specific responsibility for achieving



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

4

outcomes 1 and 3 (see the logical framework in appendix II). FCBL is the
implementing partner responsible for achieving outcome 2. The national
programme steering committee and regional programme implementation
committee will advise the office of the programme management (OPM), which will
be responsible for the delivery of results. A liaison office under the direction of the
OPM will be established within the MoAF secretariat.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

17. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. Programme activities will be reflected in
the Government’s planning and monitoring system. The OPM will establish a
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) unit to ensure that all outputs, outcomes and
impact indicators are included in the planning and monitoring system, and will
design tools to capture critical field-level data not included in the planning and
monitoring system. The annual workplan and budget will be the main planning tool,
and will be used to review programme performance and progress.

18. Learning and knowledge management. A knowledge management strategy will
be prepared to facilitate engagement in policy development related to resilient
agriculture and dairy production, and marketing support. It will include strategies
for strengthening market information systems and developing RNR training
curricula. A strong knowledge-sharing and learning culture will be built through the
use of participatory tools and knowledge from M&E, and the development of
knowledge products.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
19. Financial management. The financial management assessment for this

programme concluded that the arrangements made by the MoAF are adequate. In
view of the low fiduciary risk, the country’s public financial management systems
will be utilized provided they are consistent with IFAD guidelines and procedures.
Qualified finance staff will be in place at the OPM and liaison office. Financial
reporting will follow national accounting standards on cash-basis accounting in line
with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards. The programme’s
financial accounts will be maintained with computerized accounting software and
customized to generate financial reports.

20. Fund flow mechanism. IFAD will make funds available to the Government under
the terms and conditions of the financing agreement. Programme funds will flow
from IFAD via designated accounts established in the Royal Monetary Authority, or
another commercial bank acceptable to IFAD. The designated accounts will be
administered following imprest account arrangements. Advances from the IFAD
loan must be segregated from other funds for the programme.

21. Internal controls and external audit. Internal controls will be established to
ensure operational efficiency, reliability of reporting and compliance with IFAD’s
requirements. The Government’s Royal Audit Authority has been mandated to audit
all foreign-funded loan programmes following standards set by the International
Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. External auditing arrangements will be
established by the Royal Audit Authority.

22. Start-up costs. Expenditures for programme start-up that are inccured after the
entry into force of the financing agreement but before the satisfaction of the
conditions precedent to withdrawal, shall not exceed an aggregate amount of
SDR 25,000.

23. Procurement of goods, works and services. Procurement of goods, works and
services financed by IFAD under components 1 and 3 will be carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the Government’s Procurement Rules and
Regulations (revised June 2014). Under component 2, procurement will be carried



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

5

out according to FCBL Procurement Rules and Regulations, provided they are
consistent with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines.

24. Governance. A national programme steering committee will provide policy
direction to facilitate implementation and guide programme management. A
regional programme implementation committee will steer design and
implementation of the annual workplan and budget at the local, district and regional
levels. The national programme steering committee will resolve all programme
management issues and disputes concerning implementation; unresolved issues
may be referred to the Minister of Agriculture and Forests. The governance
framework will ensure that the programme includes: (i) mechanisms for regular
internal audits at the OPM and implementing offices; (ii) annual independent
audits; (iii) verification of fiduciary compliance during supervision; (iv) independent
impact assessments; (v) efficient public financial management systems and efforts
to ensure transparency by strengthening state oversight institutions; and
(vi) community involvement in decision-making, planning, implementation and
monitoring.

SupervisionE.
25. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. A midterm review will be

conducted halfway through the implementation period and will provide
opportunities for programme realignment and scaling up based on the availability of
funds.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total programme cost is estimated at US$31.59 million over seven years,

including contingencies. The total base costs equal US$24.18 million and physical
and price contingencies account for US$1.86 million and US$5.55 million
respectively (8 per cent and 23 per cent respectively of total base costs).
Investment costs are estimated at US$26.18 million (83 per cent of the total cost)
while recurrent costs are estimated at US$5.41 million (17 per cent of the total
cost).

Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Recipient IFAD loan Financing gap* IFAD grant
ASAP
grant Beneficiaries FCBL Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Market-led
agricultural
production 4 196.0 4 808.7 4 268.6 399.8 3 024.6 658.8 - 17 356.7
2. Value chain
development and
marketing 598.5 3 150.1 1 662.3 173.9 1 729.1 - 4 281.0 11 594.9
3. Institutional
support and policy
development 13.6 144.0 65.7 34.0 268.9 - - 526.1
4. Programme
management,
coordination, M&E 965.7 170.6 - 452.9 - - 521.5 2 110.7

Total programme
cost

5 773.8 8 273.4 5 996.6 1 060.6 5 022.6 658.8 4 802.4 31 588.3

* Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021 performance-
based allocation system (PBAS) allocations or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

6

B. Programme financing
27. The programme will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of approximately

US$8.27 million (26.2 per cent of the total programme cost); (ii) an IFAD grant of
approximately US$1.06 million (3.4 per cent of the total cost); (iii) an ASAP grant
of approximately US$5.02 million (15.9 per cent of the total cost); (iv) a mainly
in-kind beneficiary contribution estimated at US$0.66 million (2.1 per cent of the
total cost); (v) a contribution by the Government of approximately US$5.77 million
(18.3 per cent of the total cost); (vi) cofinancing from FCBL of US$4.81 million,
mainly through recurrent costs (15.2 per cent of the total cost); and (vii) a
financing gap of approximately US$6 million (19 per cent of the total cost) subject
to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the
2016-2018 or 2019-2021 PBAS allocations or cofinancing. The Government will
finance taxes and duties, most of the recurrent costs, re-training (in line with the
mandate of the MoAF) and dairy inputs.



E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.1

6

7

Table 2 a

Indicative programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Recipient IFAD loan Financing gap b IFAD grant ASAP grant Beneficiaries FCBL Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Works 580.2 10.0 2 952.1 50.9 2 046.0 35.3 - - 185.2 3.2 38.6 0.7 - - 5 802.1

2. Equipment and
materials 675.1 10.0 2 298.5 34.0 2 587.6 38.3 204.4 3.0 90.2 1.3 432.7 6.4 462.3 6.8 6 750.7

3. Vehicles 7.3 10.0 - - - - 65.8 90.0 - - - - - - 73.1

4. Goods, services and
inputs 1 241.7 34.8 826.4 23.2 727.3 20.4 47.1 1.3 533.4 15.0 187.5 5.3 - - 3 563.4

5. Consultancies 13.2 0.5 761.4 28.7 206.8 7.8 260.3 9.8 1 413.9 53.2 - - - - 2 655.6

6. Workshops 0.0 - 192.6 34.1 190.5 33.8 166.2 29.5 14.9 2.6 - - - - 564.1

7. Training 2 238.5 34.7 969.9 15.0 238.3 3.7 215.9 3.3 2 785.0 43.2 - - - - 6 447.6

8. Fund - - 272.7 83.3 - - 54.5 16.7 - - - - - - 327.3

9. Operating costs 446.7 29.0 - - - - - - - - - - 1 091.1 71.0 1 537.8

10. Salaries and
allowances 571.2 14.8 - - - - 46.3 1.2 - - - - 3 249.0 84.0 3 866.5

Total programme costs 5 773.8 18.3 8 273.4 26.2 5 996.6 19.0 1 060.6 3.4 5 022.6 15.9 658.8 2.1 4 802.4 15.2 31 588.3
a The final disbursement categories will be decided based on IFAD procedures and will include a maximum of five cost categories to maximize efficiency.
b Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021 PBAS allocations or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

8

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. All crop and farm models analysed are profitable, yielding positive net present

value. Economic analysis of the programme based on financial models and using
economic prices shows it to be profitable, with an estimated net present value of
404 million Bhutanese ngultrums or US$7.3 million, and an internal rate of return
of 16 per cent at a discount rate of 10 per cent.

29. The programme will directly benefit 28,975 households.

30. Immediate benefits include: (i) increased vegetable and dairy production;
(ii) greater use of sustainable agricultural practices; (iii) increased access to
extension and market information; (iv) sustainable extension services; (v) market
access through consolidation of production; (vi) enterprise establishment; and
(vii) greater employment opportunities. Indirect benefits include enhanced rural
employment, strengthened climate resilience and improved household nutrition.

D. Sustainability
31. The programme incorporates many features designed to promote long-term

sustainability. By selecting a limited number of value chains, production support is
area-specific and tailored to value chain planning needs, allowing subsequent
chains to be established. The programme will also build target communities’
ownership through village-level planning and implementation, including
investments in the development of operation and maintenance groups for assets.
Links between production, marketing and enterprise development will be forged to
promote the sharing of benefits between farmers and the private sector.
Accountability and ownership by farmers will be built to allow for demand-driven
services. Finally, the programme will strengthen grass-roots institutions and their
support services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. A major risk relates to the limited capacity of the implementing partner, FCBL, for

value chain and enterprise development, and PPPs. This has been mitigated by the
allocation of additional resources for strategy development, capacity development
support and targeted technical assistance. Strengthening climate change resilience
will be a challenge at the farm and community levels, and within value chains,
where risks, interests and values are diverse; success depends upon joint action
from an understanding of interdependent relationships. This risk has been mitigated
by strengthening climate-smart agriculture and farm management practices
through targeted technical assistance.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

33. The programme conforms to IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting, gender,
environmental and natural resource management, and knowledge and innovation.
In terms of its environmental impact, the programme falls under Category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
34. The programme is in line with the Government’s Eleventh Five Year Plan

(2013-2018) and will specifically contribute to expanding agriculture service
outreach to remote and vulnerable populations, and increasing smallholders’
resilience to climate change and shocks. The MoAF has developed a market-led
agriculture development strategy to facilitate the transition from subsistence to
commercial agriculture; the programme supports this strategy.

35. To enhance efficiency and reduce redundancies among government stakeholders,
the programme will aim to achieve complementarities among partners. Synergies
with the World Food Programme and the World Bank have already been identified.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

9

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

Innovations and scaling upC.
36. The programme will support the following innovations: (i) the lead farmer model for

agricultural development; (ii) animal health service models; (iii) an e-agriculture
platform; (iv) permaculture approaches; and (v) linking smallholder market
development to the Bhutan commodity exchange. Although none of these
innovations is new, their integrated application in Bhutan through the proposed
programme is innovative. In addition, efforts to strengthen local institutions’
capacity for improved outreach and sustainability in collaboration with government
service networks have not previously been undertaken in Bhutan in an integrated
manner. Linking technical innovation with the development of new models is a
significant innovation in Bhutan.

37. In its second phase, the programme will also include areas with high production
and marketing potential for vegetable value chains in the south-central and
south-western districts, adding 7,500 direct beneficiaries (1,500 households).

Policy engagementD.
38. The programme will facilitate government linkages and policy dialogue towards the

commercialization of agriculture. This includes addressing RNR institutions and
policy issues to build strong agricultural institutions and sound policies for improved
and sustainable agricultural and marketing practices.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A programme financing agreement between the Kingdom of Bhutan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Kingdom of Bhutan is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Kingdom
of Bhutan in an amount equivalent to five million eight hundred ninety
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 5,890,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Kingdom of
Bhutan in an amount equivalent to seven hundred sixty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 760,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Kingdom of Bhutan in an amount equivalent to three million five hundred
eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 3,580,000) and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia
for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project



Kingdom of Cambodia

Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Kingdom of Cambodia

Executing agency: Ministry of Commerce

Total project cost: US$61.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$36.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinanciers: Private businesses

Amount of cofinancing: US$8.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private investment through value chain innovation fund

Contribution of borrower: US$8.65 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Cambodia has made dramatic progress in reducing poverty over the last decade.

Between 2004 and 2012, poverty was reduced from 53 per cent to 17.5 per cent,
surpassing all expectations and exceeding the Millennium Development Goal
poverty target. More than 4.3 million people have moved out of poverty during this
period – mostly in rural areas – with the number of poor people dropping from
almost 7 million in 2004 to below 2.5 million in 2012 (World Bank, 2015). The
country’s vibrant and pro-poor agricultural growth was the key driver of this
dramatic reduction in poverty. More than 60 per cent of Cambodia’s poverty
reduction was attributed to the agriculture sector: higher rice prices stimulated
greater rice production, which helped to increase farm wages (World Bank, 2013).
Between 2004 and 2012, the annual growth in gross agricultural production was
8.7 per cent and agricultural value added grew by 5.3 per cent during this period.

2. Despite this significant reduction in poverty, many of the 4.3 million people that
have moved out of poverty are still vulnerable. This is because the majority of
them are still "near-poor" and are therefore extremely susceptible to slipping back
into poverty if shocks occur. Indeed, almost all of the gains of the last decade
could be reversed by an average loss of KHR 1,200 per day (US$0.30), which
would return 3 million near-poor people into poverty and raise Cambodia’s poverty
rate to 40 per cent (based on 2011 poverty data; World Bank, 2013).

3. Additional poverty reduction will depend on the success of agriculture in the
coming years since this sector involves a large share of the labour force and has a
major role in exports. Farmers are among the country’s poorest and most
vulnerable people, and the factors that drove Cambodia’s growth – especially
higher rice prices and expansion of production – are unlikely to drive significant
further growth. Continued poverty reduction will depend on finding new ways to
expand Cambodia's agricultural sector in terms of overall agricultural growth,
higher returns (especially returns on labour) and inclusiveness of growth.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Since Cambodia’s dramatic poverty reduction was largely driven by agriculture,
most poverty reduction occurred in rural areas. Given the importance of agriculture
in the rural economy, continued agricultural growth is crucial to promote further
poverty reduction and economic growth in rural communities. If farm incomes are
to keep pace with non-farm wages, returns on agricultural labour need to rise
dramatically; however agricultural growth has stalled. In order to continue
Cambodia’s poverty reduction and inclusive growth, there is a need to restart
agricultural growth through intensification, diversification and commercialization.

5. Fortunately, there are currently market opportunities for higher-return agricultural
growth and a number of important developments are enabling Cambodian farmers
and agribusinesses to capitalize on these opportunities. These include a rapidly
improving rural finance sector, promising market-support and production



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

initiatives, and farmers’ increasing interest in market opportunities for
agribusiness. However: many smallholders still cannot access financing for
investments in their farms; value chains are highly fragmented, leading to high
transaction costs; many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are informal,
which limits their capacity to invest and their understanding of new markets; many
agribusinesses struggle to aggregate supply from several smallholder farmers; and
major capacity gaps exist in competitive on-farm production and post-harvest
management. Tackling these challenges is vital if Cambodian agriculture is to
compete in both export markets and against imports from neighbouring countries.

6. The rationale for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders (AIMS) Project
is to: (i) identify a portfolio of promising growth opportunities; and (ii) work with
actors in the value chain to identify and address bottlenecks to faster growth. This
requires filling gaps in networks, skills and resources to forge a practical pathway
to growth.

7. The project design is consistent with the strategic objectives of the 2013-2018
country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP), specifically its first strategic
objective to enable poor smallholders to take advantage of market opportunities. It
is closely aligned with the Government’s policies for rural development, including
the Rectangular Strategy’s resolve to make agriculture a leading sector in the
nation’s economy and source of sustainable economic growth, and to increase food
security and reduce poverty. The project is also aligned with the Cambodia Trade
Integration Strategy 2014-2018, which addresses issues of trade-sector
competitiveness, job and income creation, and sustainable human development.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will be implemented in all parts of the country, with

actual locations determined by the selection of priority value chains. AIMS will
initially work in 15 provinces based on the section of five flagship commodities to
be supported by five multistakeholder platforms and three inter-regional technical
hubs.

9. The project’s primary beneficiaries will be smallholder farm households, including
poor and near-poor farmers, and women-headed households participating in the
supported value chains and voluntarily collaborating in project activities. Secondary
target groups include other value-chain actors such as agricultural cooperatives,
farmer organizations, SMEs, agribusinesses, service enterprises and industry
associations. The project will aim to make agriculture and value-chain integration
more attractive to the younger generation as a profitable business.

B. Project development objective
10. The project’s development objective is to increase returns from farming for

smallholders, including poor farmers and youth, through efficient public-sector
investment. There are expected to be 75,000 direct household beneficiaries of the
project with increased assets of at least 25 per cent.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project will have two technical components and one project management

component:

 Component 1: Value chain development will focus on brokering,
facilitation, innovation and capacity-building to support the inclusive growth
of five high-value product value chains covering crops and livestock. Value
chain brokering and facilitation through a cluster approach will form the core
of the component’s approach. This cluster approach will geographically group
key actors along the value chain in the same geographic areas. For AIMS,
value-chain actors will typically be defined by zones of production, which form
discrete buying zones that include a number of competing buyers and
traders.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IFAD’s public-private-producer partnership models will be drawn upon for the
supported contract farming arrangements. Building on both existing and
emerging production clusters, the project will: (i) follow a consistent process
to develop and promote links between buyers, producers and service
providers through multistakeholder platforms and contract farming
mechanisms; (ii) give priority to innovation in local value chains, especially
through a value chain innovation fund (VCIF) and; (iii) promote the
development of local markets for private-sector support services.

 Component 2: Value chain financing will aim to increase private
investment in priority value chains by farmers, SMEs, agricultural
cooperatives, agribusinesses, service providers and others. Priorities for the
investment agenda in each value chain will be driven by the private
value-chain actors via the brokerage and facilitation process supported
through component 1. The value chain financing component will employ a
two-pronged approach to stimulate private investment in priority value
chains. This approach will be implemented through two sub-components:

(i) 2.1 Value chain investment support. AIMS will provide direct financial
support to stimulate private investment through the VCIF and a credit
line for policy-based financing to be administered by the Rural
Development Bank or a third-party fund administrator. The total value of
investment support will be approximately US$18 million. The total value
of support grants and loans available to each value chain through the
VCIF and line of credit should be broadly proportionate to the expected
development outcomes of that value chain (including the number of
farmers benefiting and each farmer’s increased profit). Only investments
assessed as commercially feasible will be eligible.

(ii) 2.2 Financial service provider partnerships. Private investment in
high-value agriculture can only be accelerated with significantly increased
financing from banks and microfinance institutions to farmers,
agricultural cooperatives, SMEs, agribusinesses and service providers.
AIMS will initially partner with three major microfinance institutions with
substantial agricultural portfolios and the internal capacity to lend for
agriculture (for example having dedicated agricultural finance officers).

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

12. The project design is based on the following principles:

(a) Only commercially viable value chains and investments will be supported.
This is essential for supported value chains to sustain long-term
competitiveness and self-sufficiency after project implementation without
public subsidies.

(b) To attract IFAD support, value chains must have real potential for inclusive
growth and involve significant numbers of poor farmers who are able to earn
profits from the growing value chains along with other enterprises.

(c) From the start, AIMS will promote the development of critical business-
support services and input markets, which are a vital to sustaining a
competitive industry that strengthens the primary value chain.

(d) AIMS will build the capacity of individuals, institutions, networks and systems
while delivering project results.

(e) The project will promote learning from best practices elsewhere, refining and
adapting approaches that work well in the Cambodian context.

B. Organizational framework
13. Project implementation will be primarily decentralized, with overall project

coordination provided by the Ministry of Commerce (MOC) as lead implementation



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

agency (LIA). MOC will support project activities through three regional hubs and
the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will collaborate with the contracted
fund administrator for the VCIF and the Rural Development Bank or a qualified
private bank for the line of credit.

14. MOC will be the lead executing agency for the project and will lead component 1,
with the responsibility of coordinating business development and agriculture
marketing. This ministry will host a project management office (PMO), which will
include the component 1 management team led by the AIMS project director. The
PMO will be responsible for overall financial management, reporting and
administration in collaboration with the MOC Directorate General for Domestic
Trade. The Department for International Cooperation of MOC will be responsible for
financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
communication and reporting.

15. MEF will be the implementing agency for component 2 (value chain financing). The
component 2 team will establish a management office within this ministry, which
will supervise the appointed VCIF fund administrator and Rural Development Bank
or a qualified private bank in relation to the line of credit. Overall, as per its
borrower’s representative role, MEF will also be responsible for: (i) inter-agency
coordination; (ii) providing government fiduciary oversight and management;
(iii) providing sufficient and timely counterpart contributions to finance project
activities, including payment of government staff salaries; and (iv) timely
processing of withdrawal applications, procurement approvals and other necessary
documents according to standard operating procedures.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
16. Planning and M&E. Planning processes and schedules within AIMS will be

harmonized with the regular planning processes of MEF and MOC. A major focus for
M&E will be the establishment of a highly effective management information
system (including online and offline, Internet and mobile devices) to provide
project managers and value chain teams with timely and reliable information on
developments in each priority value chain. This will allow intervention plans to be
assessed and information and networks from neighboring provinces and countries
to be integrated.

17. The M&E system will utilize regularly updated results chains and M&E frameworks
for each priority value chain to compliment IFAD’s Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS), and the project logframe. The use of results chains for individual
value chains will enable the identification and tracking of change indicators for each
value chain and cluster. The results chains will also be powerful tools for
communication among value-chain stakeholders regarding opportunities,
bottlenecks and joint action

18. Learning and knowledge management. Effective and efficient learning,
knowledge management and communication are central to meeting the project’s
objective through communities of practice, social networks and online systems.
AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order
to contribute to policy development. The project will also seek to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development,
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities and project management will integrate
effective knowledge management and communication. The knowledge
management and communication strategy will play an important role in ensuring
that the project achieves its indented outcomes. This strategy will be coordinated
by the Department for International Cooperation on behalf of the PMO and will
include a full-time knowledge management and communications officer from this
department.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The project’s financial management will be in line with

the standard operating procedures for externally funded projects (used by all



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

donor-funded programmes in Cambodia) and supervised by IFAD to ensure that:
(i) funds are used efficiently and for intended purposes; (ii) disbursements of
project funds facilitate rapid implementation; (iii) funds are well managed and flow
smoothly; (iv) accurate financial reports are issued in a timely manner; (v) a
robust flow of reliable information on project activities ensures accountability; and
(vi) project assets and resources are safeguarded. The Ministries of Commerce and
Economy and Finance will be authorized to manage all project-related bank
accounts, including those utilized for government counterpart funding.

20. Flow of funds. As lead executing agency, MOC shall open and maintain a
designated account in United States dollars at the National Bank of Cambodia to
receive the loan proceeds from the account maintained by IFAD and an account in
United States dollars to receive and manage the government counterpart funds for
the project. MOC shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 1. MEF shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 2 and coordination activities.

21. Procurement. Procurement shall be carried out in accordance with the updated
standard operating procedures promulgated under the law on public procurement
for implementing all externally funded projects. The standard operating procedures
detail the procedures, processes, good governance framework and controls as
established in the procurement manual. Government rules and procedures will be
applied and as long they are consistent with IFAD’s procurement guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. All procedures for project implementation
and management will be documented in the project implementation manual and
consistently applied. The manual shall include provisions regulating the
establishment of internal controls, monitoring and review of transactions, and
accounting software requirements. An independent private auditor will be hired for
the annual audit of consolidated financial statements (including those prepared by
both MEF and MOC). Proper terms of reference for audits will be an important
safeguard for all stakeholders. These terms of reference will include visits to
implementing partners and service providers, and field visits when appropriate. The
audited financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the
six months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. A project level good governance framework will cover procurement,
financial management, disclosure, civil society participation, ethical conduct,
sanctions and project-specific issues. The project will support the strengthening of
national financial management and procurement capacity.

E. Supervision
24. AIMS will be jointly supervised by the Government and IFAD. Joint supervision

missions will be conducted at least once per financial year with additional
implementation support missions mobilized as necessary. A mid-term review shall
be conducted jointly by the borrower and IFAD at the end of the third project year
to: assess the progress, achievements, constraints, emerging impacts and
sustainability of the project, and make recommendations and necessary
adjustments for the remainder of the disbursement period.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$62.1 million. Indicative costs for each

component are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category
and financier are provided in table 2.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Value Chain
development 13 994 66.4 - - 273 1.3 6 810 32.3 21 077
2. Value Chain financing 20 721 54.9 8 586 22.7 7 843 20.8 602 1.6 37 751
3. Project Coordination
and knowledge
management 1 542 55.4 - - - - 1 243 44.6 2 785

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

B. Project financing
26. AIMS is to be financed by an IFAD loan, a private-sector contribution (by

beneficiaries and businesses) and the Government. IFAD will finance
US$36.3 million (58.8 per cent) of project costs as a loan to the Government. The
Government will finance US$8.65 million (14 per cent of total costs). Project
beneficiaries are expected to contribute US$8.1 million (13.2 per cent) and private
businesses are expected to contribute US$8.6 million (13.9 per cent).
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Government
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Consultancies 2 284 60 - 0 - 0 1 522 40 3 806
2. Equipment and
material - 0 - 0 - 0 721 100 721
3. Training 3 544 50 - 0 - 0 3 544 50 7 088
4. Credit and guarantee
funds 8 967 100 - 0 - 0 - 0 8 967
5. Grants and subsidies 18 594 52.7 8 586 24.3 8 116 23 - 0 35 296
6. Salaries and
allowances 2 867 50 - 0 - 0 2 867 50 5 734

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. AIMS will generate financial and social benefits by introducing improved

agricultural practices, commercial farming of high-value crops and improved post-
harvest management in rain-fed and irrigated crop and livestock production.
Financial benefits will include greater incomes for households targeted by the
project. Social benefits will include reduced poverty in the targeted project areas as
a result of increased household income and improved employment opportunities in
the agriculture sector.

28. The economic rationale for AIMS is based on: (i) improved agricultural productivity
and reduction of post-harvest losses as a result of the introduction of improved
technologies; and (ii) increased cropping intensity and cultivation of high-value
crop varieties and livestock with drip irrigation to expand dry-season production.
With a potential increase in yields of between 50 per cent and 100 per cent from
drip-irrigation, these improved production practices and integrated soil fertility
measures are expected to significantly improve household incomes.

29. The economic analysis of the project indicates that AIMS is robust in economic
terms. The overall economic internal rate of return is estimated at 31.9 per cent,
which is above the opportunity cost of capital in Cambodia. The economic internal
rate of return was estimated based on the assumption that 70 per cent of target



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

farmers will adopt the improved technology promoted by the project, and will
expand the use of drip-irrigation cultivation.

D. Sustainability
30. Financial sustainability is at the core of the AIMS approach, which seeks to catalyze

profitable private-led investments by farmers and businesses into value chains and
associated private service enterprises. The project is expected to facilitate the
successful operation of farmer groups, agribusinesses and other enterprises in each
value chain. Institutional sustainability of critical value-chain facilitation activities
will be achieved by building strong and mutually beneficial relationships among
farmers, private businesses and government agencies, especially via
multistakeholder platforms and regional hub teams.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main identified risks include: (i) ineffective targeting of poor smallholders;

(ii) a lack of market opportunities, which may limit the scale of impact;
(iii) unfamiliar approaches to market-oriented agriculture development;
(iv) insufficient flexibility in resource allocation and action plans; and (v) a lack of
coordination between national and sub-national agencies, and the private sector.
To mitigate these risks, the project will: (i) ensure rigorous and objective value
chain assessment and selection; (ii) select and screen five initial products targeted
to the domestic and export markets for market demand and profitability;
(iii) provide intensive and sustained technical assistance (including social
mobilization) and mainstream value chain activities, taking into account previous
experiences in the region; and (iv) ensure that managers have up-to-date
information on each value chain through M&E systems based on current best
practices (e.g. the Donor Committee for Enterprise Development Standard). In
addition, MEF will: (i) ensure overall coordination; (ii) implement the project
through field-based hub offices; and (iii) directly involve stakeholders in project
delivery as members of regional hub teams and in project governance via the
project steering committee.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

32. The design of AIMS complies with IFAD policies and strategies on targeting,
gender, indigenous peoples, environmental and natural resource management, and
private-sector engagement. Consideration has been given in project design to
gender in the division of labour within selected value chains and to the barriers
women face in project participation. Most of the activities related to environmental
impact fall under category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
33. The multistakeholder platform that will be implemented by AIMS in each value

chain cluster will provide a sub-national forum for all stakeholders to harmonize
their support of local value chains, including other development actors. AIMS will
be harmonized with other major projects including the Agriculture Services
Programme for Innovation, Resilience and Extension implemented by the Ministry
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, which will strengthen public and private
extension services and decentralize investment budgets through programme-based
budgeting. This will enable provincial departments of agriculture to respond to local
priorities identified through multistakeholder platforms. AIMS will also be
harmonized with the Boosting Food Production Project, implemented by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries General Directorate of Agriculture,
which will complement AIMS activities in the rice sector and share joint
multistakeholder platforms for vegetables in common provinces. In addition, AIMS
will build on the progress of a project supported by the French Development
Agency in the rice sector and planned value chain infrastructure investments in the
forthcoming Asian Development Bank Value Chain Project, which will also support
value chains and provinces targeted by AIMS.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Innovations and scaling upC.
34. The review of the 2008-2012 COSOP identified the need for a more pragmatic

approach to maximize synergies between projects, improve knowledge
management, harmonize with development partners and ensure sustained
improvements in the capacity of public extension services. The scaling up study
also emphasized the importance of improved knowledge management and the
identification of opportunities. AIMS responds to the recommendation of this study
that IFAD [in Cambodia] rebalance its operational goals with more of an emphasis
on becoming truly a learning and scaling-up organization. This will be
operationalized through the project’s multistakeholder value chain initiatives and
its explicit focus on learning, knowledge management and communication.

Policy engagementD.
35. AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order

to contribute to policy development. The project also seeks to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development and
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities. The knowledge management and
communication strategy will ensure that evidence-based policy analysis reaches
key decision makers in a useable form while facilitating broad-based stakeholder
engagement policy dialogue.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Kingdom of Cambodia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

37. The Kingdom of Cambodia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Kingdom of Cambodia in the amount of thirty-six million three hundred
thousand United States Dollars (US$36,300,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


































































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of India
for the Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal
Groups Empowerment and Livelihoods
Improvement Programme

Republic of India

Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
Empowerment and Livelihoods Improvement Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of India

Executing agency: Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes Development
Department, Government of Odisha

Total programme cost: US$130.39 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 36.4 million (equivalent to approximately
US$51.20 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 25 years, including a grace period of five years, with
interest on the principal amount outstanding at a fixed
rate of 1.25 per cent per annum plus a service charge
of 0.75 per cent

Contribution of borrower: US$76.18 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.00 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.11

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of India for the Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
Empowerment and Livelihoods Improvement Programme, as contained in
paragraph 48.

Proposed loan to the Republic of India for the Odisha
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups Empowerment and
Livelihoods Improvement Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite its middle-income status, poverty reduction remains an important

challenge for India: 33 per cent of the world’s poor live in the country and poverty
has not fallen at the same pace as economic growth. Nutritional levels are
unacceptably low, with 42.5 per cent of children underweight for their age, being
one of the highest rates globally. Prevailing social inequality and the low
nutritional, educational and social status of women are considered key factors
contributing to the prevalence of malnutrition in children below the age of five.

2. India’s population is composed of several ethnic groups, speaking diverse
languages and more than 1,000 dialects. Poverty is particularly severe among
tribal populations. These groups identify themselves in more than 5,400 castes and
tribes and follow five major religions. India’s tribal populations are officially
registered as Scheduled Tribes (STs) according to distinct cultural and ethnic
features. STs, numbering 104.3 million in the 2011 census, constitute
approximately 8.6 per cent of India’s population. Unlike Scheduled Castes (SCs),
which are dispersed throughout the country, STs have traditionally been
concentrated in specific parts of the country characterized by forests, hills and
undulating inaccessible areas. This results in reduced access to basic services and
fewer opportunities for economic development. The decline in the poverty rate is
much slower for ST populations than for the general population. Of the total ST
populations, approximately 2.6 million (2.5 per cent) belong to Particularly
Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PTGs). This classification is reserved for the most
disadvantaged of all ST communities. Currently, 75 identified PTGs are spread
across 17 Indian states and union territories.

3. The proposed Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups Empowerment and
Livelihood Improvement Programme (OPELIP) will work in Odisha State, which has
one of the highest number of PTGs. Odisha is geographically the 8th largest state
and the 11th most populous among Indian states. Poverty rates of rural populations
are double those of their urban counterparts.

4. Odisha is home to 62 STs including 13 PTGs, which are concentrated in the Eastern
Ghats and the Northern Plateau. Both these regions are characterized by rugged
hilly terrain and high rainfall. Together they account for most of the state’s forests.
PTGs living in Odisha derive their livelihood mainly from shifting cultivation, rainfed
agriculture and the gathering of non-timber forest products (NTFPs). The incidence
of landlessness is high and farming practices have remained primitive, with rainfed
paddy and millets being the main crops.



EB 2015/114/R.11

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Several provisions in the Indian Constitution seek to ensure better quality of life for
PTGs. Yet their economic status has not improved. They rank poorly on all
development indicators, such as food and nutrition security, literacy and health.
Given their high dependence on an ecologically complex natural resource base,
they are also highly vulnerable to variability in weather and climate shocks. Owing
to poor farming systems and a lack of focus on the development of rainfed areas,
PTG areas have suffered widespread land degradation. Efforts are thus needed to
reverse this downward spiral of low productivity and a declining resource base.

6. To deliver services to the 17 PTG areas, the Government of India has established
microproject agencies (MPAs). However, a consolidated high-intensity, integrated
programme of support through these institutions – with clear targets and time
frames – is still missing. The OPELIP will deliver this by capitalizing on institutional
development that has already taken place, and will provide a range of services to
PTGs through appropriate development initiatives.

7. The OPELIP will build on the experience of the IFAD-supported Orissa Tribal
Empowerment and Livelihoods Programme (OTELP), which has successfully
demonstrated an integrated development package in tribal areas. OTELP set up
village-level bodies and involved tribal groups in planning and implementation of
various development initiatives, especially development of the natural resources.
Encouraged by the success of OTELP, the Government of Odisha has requested
IFAD to scale up the approach into PTG areas. This is the first time an external
development partner has been asked to work in these most remote and difficult
areas of the state.

8. The programme is closely aligned with the priorities and strategies of both the
Government of India and the State Government of Odisha and will particularly
support the objective of achieving “faster and more inclusive growth”. It is
compatible with and supportive of other donor initiatives and will directly address
the strategic objectives of IFAD’s results-based country strategic opportunities
programme (RB-COSOP). The current RB-COSOP became effective in April 2011
and is jointly reviewed by IFAD and the Government of India annually to ensure full
alignment with national priorities and policies.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. OPELIP interventions will be implemented in 17 MPA areas located in 12 districts of

Odisha (Angul, Deogarh, Gajapati, Ganjam, Kalahandi, Kandhamal, Keojhar,
Malkanagiri, Mayurbhanj, Nuapada, Rayagada,and Sundergarh). This will cover
13 PTGs living in some 1,019 villages and hamlets and 84 gram panchayats (the
local self-governing institution at the village level). Overall, the programme will
cover 62,356 households.

10. In line with IFAD’s policy on targeting, the OPELIP will target marginalized groups:
women, children, unemployed youth, hill-area cultivators, the landless among
PTGs, and other tribal peoples. Based on geographical targeting, it will work in a
predefined number of MPA gram panchayats. Some programme interventions –
such as village development planning and the associated village institutions, and
infrastructure such as rural roads – will benefit 100 per cent of the population living
in these gram panchayats. To ensure precise targeting of marginalized groups, a
specific targeting strategy has been developed for each component.

B. Programme development objective
11. The overall goal of the OPELIP is to achieve enhanced living conditions and reduced

poverty in target group households. It will support improved livelihoods and food



EB 2015/114/R.11

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and nutrition security for 32,090 PTG households, 13,970 other tribal households
and 10,810 other poor and 5,486 SC households. This will be achieved, in turn, by
building the capacity of target households, securing their entitlements to land and
forest, improving their agricultural practices to enhance production, promoting
income-generating microenterprises for alternate livelihoods, ensuring access to
services such as education and health, and improving community infrastructure. To
achieve the objective of empowerment, the programme will promote women’s self-
help groups (SHGs), organize village development committees (VDCs) for the
planning and implementation of programme interventions and train community
resource people (CRPs) to provide needed services in production, marketing and
legal assistance.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The OPELIP will have four components: community empowerment; natural

resource management (NRM) and livelihood improvement; community
infrastructure and drudgery reduction; and programme management.

13. Component 1: Community empowerment. Empowerment is the key
prerequisite to developing PTGs. It will be addressed through a series of capacity-
building initiatives, entry point activities and mobilization of community-based
organizations. Accordingly, the component will have two subcomponents:

(i) Community institutions. Promotion of village development associations
(VDAs) for the planning and execution of need-based community activities
that cover natural resource management, community-based paralegal
services, community-based health, hygiene and nutrition education, and
community infrastructure. Major activities will include: (a) engaging the
services of 17 NGOs supported by about 360 CRPs; (b) training of trainers
and capacity-building of CRPs; (c) mobilization of VDCs and capacity-building
of VDC members; (d) implementation of entry point activities in all 1,019
villages, as identified by VDCs; and (e) preparation of village development
plans (VDPs) and facilitation of VDCs in implementing activities identified in
VDPs.

(ii) Strengthening SHGs and rural finance. Promotion of SHGs and rural finance
services to enable social development of SHG members through facilitating
group savings and credit, and through building capacity. Key interventions
will include formation and strengthening of 3,800 SHGs, training of
microfinance CRPs, formation of 84 gram panchayat cluster-level forums
(GPLFs), provision of pro-poor and vulnerability reduction funds to SHGs and
community investment funds to GPLFs, and piloting of two cooperative
societies.

14. Component 2: Natural resource management and livelihood improvement.
Historically, PTGs have lived deeper inside forests than other STs, and some PTGs,
such as the Birhor and Mankirdia, were nomadic until recently. To support the
transition from hunting-gathering to shifting cultivation and eventually to settled
farming, this component will have three subcomponents:

(i) Natural resource management. Key interventions will include: (a) services of
an NGO specialized in land surveys and the issuing of land titles to PTGs;
(b) treatment of 20,000 hectares of arable land and construction of
900 irrigation structures; (c) capacity-building of 18,000 farmers in crop
development and horticulture; and (d) support to horticulture development
and cereal food crops, including oilseeds, pulses and tubers, in all villages.

(ii) Food and nutrition security. This will include: (a) training of school children
and SHG members in malnutrition, locally available nutritious foods,
preparation of nutritious food using local materials, sanitation and
alcoholism; (b) focus on cultivating locally available traditional food crops;



EB 2015/114/R.11

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

(c) nutrition-intensive interventions such as kitchen gardens, backyard
poultry- and goat-rearing; and (d) promotion of “convergence” to address
gaps in the areas of food availability, health, water and sanitation.

(iii) Livelihood improvement. The programme will support: (a) selection and
training of community service providers (CSPs); (b) household production
support; (c) market access support for producer collectives; (d) support for
NTFP marketing; and (e) vocational training and strengthening of PTG culture
and traditions.

15. Component 3: Community infrastructure and drudgery reduction. PTG
villages are characterized by poor housing, limited or no access to potable water
year round, absence of sanitation facilities, limited or no access to electricity and
limited or no road infrastructure. Some villages in the programme area have no
school buildings and, in those that do, in many cases the buildings are dilapidated
and without drinking water and sanitation facilities. Many villages do not have
paved roads or drainage inside the settlements, and children play in extremely
unhygienic conditions, especially during the rainy season. Though NTFPs constitute
a major livelihood source for PTGs, there are no platforms for drying and sorting
these commodities or for storage to facilitate collective marketing. This will be
addressed through two subcomponents:

(i) Community infrastructure. The programme will support construction of:
(a) 300 drinking water schemes and 542 school toilets; (b) 4,000 housing
units and habitat development; (c) 500 km of roads and 50 km of
electrification; and (d) infrastructure for 542 drying yards, 84 market yards,
250 aggregation centres and 250 SHG worksheds; and will provide power
tiller units, 2,000 irrigation pump sets and 84 hydram units. Operation and
maintenance of these facilities will be through VDCs, and village volunteers
will be trained as community mechanics.

(ii) Drudgery reduction. Under this subcomponent, the programme will support:
(a) construction of 35,000 smokeless wood stoves; (b) installation of
20,000 solar lanterns; (c) maintenance of fuelwood reserves in 540 villages;
and (d) construction of 84 milling units for hulling rice, millet, etc.

16. Component 4: Programme management. This component will have three
subcomponents: (i) a programme management unit (PMU) will be set up within the
lead programme agency; (ii) the programme will strengthen the 17 existing MPAs
through staffing and facilities; and (iii) a programme monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and knowledge management (KM) unit will be set up within the PMU. The
programme will make an effort to strengthen existing systems within the MPAs,
rather than creating parallel ones.

17. Major outcomes of the OPELIP will include: 1,019 VDCs organized and functional;
3,800 SHGs and 84 GPLFs organized and functional; at least a 50 per cent
reduction in rural indebtedness; 100 per cent of PTG households holding
homestead titles and 75 per cent of them land titles; 43,000 households receiving
land and water management treatment measures; 19,000 households accessing
irrigation and an almost equal number of households planting fruit and spice crops;
31,000 households increasing cereal, millet, pulse and oilseed production;
9,000 households starting an income-generating activity; all households accessing
a water supply, and market and road connectivity; and 32,000 PTG households
having kitchen gardens, smokeless wood stoves and access to community fuelwood
reserves.



EB 2015/114/R.11

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
18. The OPELIP has been designed to follow the successful bottom-up planning

approach of OTELP. Success under OTELP was attributed to the fact that the
implementation process was owned by tribal peoples. With local community
institutions at the heart of the programme, the new design focuses on scaling up
activities that have already been tested and proven successful in Odisha. The
programme will adopt an integrated approach involving support for improved
access to land, natural resources, agricultural technologies, financial services,
markets, productive and social infrastructure, and essential social services. Gender
empowerment will be mainstreamed in all activities. Given the extremely severe
malnutrition situation in PTG villages, the design has also piloted an approach to
mainstreaming nutrition-sensitive agricultural activities across all components.

B. Organizational framework
19. At the national level, the Department of Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Finance

will be the nodal agency for the programme. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs will be
involved in overall policy guidance.

20. At the state level, the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes Development
Department (STSCDD) will be the lead programme agency. Overall policy guidance
will be provided through a programme steering committee under the Chief
Secretary. A PMU set up within STSCDD will have overall responsibility for day-to-
day management of the programme and the functions relating to planning, funds
flow, M&E, gender mainstreaming, policy dialogue and KM.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. Planning. The programme will follow the planning process undertaken by the
respective MPA, taking the specific objectives and purposes of the OPELIP into
account. A draft annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be drawn up by the
PMU, consolidating all microplans, in consultation with the respective MPAs and
partner NGOs.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will measure progress and
performance, and will be a learning and decision-making tool at various levels. The
PMU will establish an M&E unit, which will support progress monitoring by
programme field implementation units and partner NGOs. The M&E unit will also
monitor programme outcomes and impacts through, among other tools, annual
outcome surveys and by applying the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS) in accordance with IFAD guidelines. Semi-annual and annual reports will
also contain sections on analysis, interpretation and recommendations from
process monitoring, lessons learned and best practices.

23. Learning and knowledge management. Information generated by the
programme will be disseminated through IFAD websites, newsletters, thematic
reports and at learning events. The programme will develop a KM strategy and
appropriate action plans. KM will be used as a tool for internal learning by
programme stakeholders such as the staff of various implementing agencies, and
participating villagers and farmers, both women and men. Activities will include
regular review meetings at village/cluster, MPA and state levels and the production
of knowledge products such as newsletters (in local languages), briefs, training
materials, technical manuals, booklets, posters, videos, etc.

24. The OPELIP will also use audio/video systems to disseminate information from
farmer to farmer and village to village. It will build on the KM culture and practices
of OTELP and on the Digital Green programme to amplify knowledge through
combining technology and social organizations for community transformation.



EB 2015/114/R.11

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. The OPELIP will build on the experience of the ongoing

OTELP. During implementation, the PMU will consolidate the AWP/B, including the
annual action plan for conservation-cum-development1 of microprojects, and
submit the consolidated AWP/B to the programme management committee for
approval. Financial accounting for the OPELIP will be done through computerized
accounting software at all levels. The software will be customized to generate
financial reports for the national and state governments and for IFAD according to
specific requirements. After programme start-up, the PMU will enter into a
subsidiary agreement with each MPA. Each MPA will submit a monthly progress
report to the PMU electronically. Strong internal control procedures will be
introduced, including adequate segregation of duties, especially at the MPA level.
Detailed procedures for recording, management and safeguarding of fixed
programme assets will be detailed in the programme implementation manual. An
internal auditor will be hired to provide continuous monitoring and review of
financial systems and procedures.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD financing of the programme will be routed through an
account designated to receive funds in advance (designated account), denominated
in United States dollars and maintained at the Reserve Bank of India. The
Controller, Aid, Accounts and Audit, Department of Economic Affairs (Ministry of
Finance, Government of India), will administer the designated account. Funds will
flow from STSCDD to the PMU bank account as non-lapsable funds in one or two
tranches, and funds from the PMU will be transferred to MPAs as grants-in-aid.
IFAD’s share of funds reimbursed to the Government of Odisha will flow to that
Government through the prescribed national procedures for budgetary support to
state governments. The PMU will release funds to the microprojects based on the
approved AWP/B for implementation of programme activities. The PMU will open a
separate bank account in a bank mutually acceptable to IFAD and STSCDD. Each
MPA will open a separate bank account, in any bank mutually acceptable to the
Government of Odisha and IFAD, to receive funds from the PMU and carry out
eligible expenditures.

27. Audit. The external auditing arrangements for the OPELIP will be established in
two tiers: (i) independent external audit; and (ii) compliance and performance
audit by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India. As the
OPELIP PMU will be a part of STSCDD, CAG will undertake compliance and
performance audit of the department, in addition to the independent external
audit.

28. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services financed from resources
provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with IFAD’s
project procurement guidelines and procurement handbook, 2010. Procurement
will be undertaken in accordance with a consolidated procurement plan submitted
by the PMU and approved by the programme management committee and IFAD.

29. Governance. An intregrated framework for good governance has been developed
to ensure: (i) information transparency in the public domain; (ii) accountability in
the use of resources; and (iii) participation of the communities in decisions that
may affect them. The involvement of affected communities at all stages of
programme implementation can simultaneously improve development of outcomes
and reduce the scope for fraud and corruption. Key features of this governance
framework include, among others, use of a computerized financial management
system; setting up of a complaints and remedies mechanism; rotation of group
leaders of VDC, SHG, GPLF and social audit of group programme accounts; and
regular IFAD implementation support and supervision missions.

1 From the “Conservation-cum-Development Plan for PTGs” (Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Government of India).



EB 2015/114/R.11

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Supervision
30. The OPELIP will be directly supervised by IFAD. During the programme’s start-up

phase, IFAD will attend the state-level start-up workshop and participate in
discussions on the programme’s approach and strategy. It will field annual
supervision missions, which will review progress with regard to physical targets,
compliance with fiduciary responsibilities and follow-up on audit recommendations,
and will result in agreed actions to further enhance progress and performance.
Government of Odisha representatives will participate in these supervision
missions. IFAD will also field implementation support missions on specific technical
issues.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
31. Total programme costs are estimated at 7,954.15 million Indian rupees (Rs)

(US$130.39 million), including contingencies (US$6.30 million), over an eight-year
period. Key assumptions used in estimating programme costs include: (i) price
contingencies assumed at 5 per cent and applied on all items, except for grant and
subsidies categories and staff salaries financed by IFAD; (ii) an exchange rate of
Rs 61 per United States dollar; (iii) taxes and duties of 5 per cent on training, staff
and operating costs, of 15 per cent on service provider contracts and civil works,
and of 10 per cent on goods and equipment; (iv) all unit costs input in the local
currency unit (i.e. Rs); and (v) taxes excluded from IFAD financing.
Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
Borrower/

counterpart IFAD Beneficiaries Total

1. Community empowerment
Community institutions 6 449 9 653 - 16 102
Strengthening SHGs and rural finance 602 5 654 - 6 256

Subtotal community empowerment 7 051 15 307 - 22 357

2. Natural resource management and livelihood improvement
Natural resource management 13 718 8 584 2 116 24 418
Food and nutrition security 961 4 574 - 5 534
Livelihood improvement 1 313 7 565 559 9 437

Subtotal natural resource management and livelihood
improvement

15 991 20 723 2 676 39 390

3. Community infrastructure and drudgery reduction
Community infrastructure 40 641 1 126 69 41 836
Drudgery reduction 826 4 333 257 5 416

Subtotal community infrastructure and drudgery reduction 41 467 5 459 327 47 253

4. Programme management
Programme management unit 1 861 2 547 - 4 408
Microproject agency unit 9 615 6 369 - 15 984
M&E and KM 201 803 - 1 004

Subtotal programme management 11 677 9 719 - 21 396

Total cost 76 185 51 209 3 002 130 396

B. Programme financing
32. The programme will be funded through IFAD financing and Government of Odisha

counterpart financing from state budgetary resources, from funds under article
275(1) Special Central Assistance to Tribal Peoples Sub Plan, from the
conservation-cum-development fund and through beneficiary contributions. IFAD
will provide a loan of about US$51.20 million. The Government will provide



EB 2015/114/R.11

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

US$76.18 million, including staff costs, operating costs and the annual budget
allocation for development of PTGs and other STs. Beneficiaries are expected to
make an in kind contribution of labour equivalent to US$3.00 million.
Table 2
Indicative programme costs by expenditure, category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
Borrower /

counterpart Percentage IFAD Percentage Beneficiaries Percentage Total

1. Civil work 47 043 84.9 7 131 12.9 1 246 2.2 55 420
2. Traininga 2 423 16.4 11 761 79.8 559 3.8 14 744
3. Goods, services
and inputs 15 978 43.9 19 187 52.8 1 197 3.3 36 362
4. Grants - - 7 149 100.0 - - 7 149
5. Operating costsb 10 741 64.2 5 981 35.8 - - 16 721

Total programme
costs

76 185 58.4 51 209 39.3 3 002 2.3 130 396

a Training and capacity-building.
b Includes staff salaries.

33. Retroactive financing. With a view to ensuring that the OPELIP start-up proceeds
smoothly, preparatory activities related to the NRM and livelihood improvement
component, certain staff costs, and preparation of a baseline survey and manuals
are proposed to be undertaken from April 2014 to entry-into-force of the financing
agreement. Accordingly, as an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural
Development Financing, approval for IFAD retroactive financing for expenditures up
to US$406,240 is recommended. These proposed expenditures will fall under two
expenditure categories: (i) goods, services and inputs; and (ii) training and
capacity-building (table 3). The expenditures incurred will be reimbursed to the
borrower after the programme enters into force.
Table 3
Indicative retroactive financing by component, cost category and financier
(United States dollars)

Component
Disbursement account
category

Estimated
expenditure

Amount to be
reimbursed by IFAD

1. Community empowerment
Wages to multipurpose workers Goods, services and inputs 72 000 36 000

2. NRM and livelihood improvement
Engaging the services of a rural
organization

Training and capacity-building 320 000 256 000

4. Programme management
Baseline survey Training and capacity-building 134 400 107 520
Preparation of finance manual Training and capacity-building 8 400 6 720

Total 534 800 406 240

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Programme investments have an overall internal rate of return of 23 per cent, with

a net present value of Rs 7,840 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.85. The
programme remains viable if costs increase and/or benefits decrease by
25 per cent. Farm model analysis shows significant increases in food production
from 510 kg to 1,020 kg per household, with net incomes increasing several fold
over existing levels.

35. A total of 62,356 households (comprising 32,090 PTGs; 13,970 other ST
households; 5,486 SC households; and 10,810 others) would benefit directly from
the programme.



EB 2015/114/R.11

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

36. Immediate benefits from the OPELIP include: (i) increased productivity through the
introduction of better management practices and improved farming practices;
(ii) minimized soil erosion; (iii) reduced runoff and increased infiltration;
(iv) enhancement of organic content of the soil; (v) greater social cohesion among
target group communities due to greater interaction with VDAs and SHGs;
(vi) security of land tenure due to recognition of the usufruct rights of PTGs and
restoration of alienated land; and (vii) increased recognition of and participation by
women.

D. Sustainability
37. The land survey and land allocation, with land title rights, provided to PTGs is

expected to trigger sustained improvements in land use and overall productivity.
Quality of the produce will be ensured through provision of quality seed and
seedlings by the programme and through capacity-building. Marketing could be a
constraint in the initial years, but would be overcome through the operations of
producers’ collectives and the provision of market infrastructure, as demand is
increasing for produce from the programme area. Increased capacity of the target
groups to undertake intercropping and other small enterprises through programme
support will enhance the sustainability of livelihoods.

38. The programme will contribute to environmental and NRM sustainability. Planting of
fruit trees in the current shifting cultivation areas will help protect soils and
improve productivity. The fruit trees and spice crops will provide PTGs and other
STs a regular and more reliable source of income and will reduce the temptation to
encroach on forest lands. In addition, programme participants will receive technical
training in good agricultural practices, improved soil fertility and soil health
management, eco-restoration techniques, planting along contour lines to prevent
erosion, and organic farming.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. There are a number of risks associated with the programme as detailed in the

logical framework. The goal-level risk of lack of support by the Government is
reduced by the Government commitment to continue tribal development
programmes and to enhance investment. The development-objective-level risk of
social instability is addressed by promoting and supporting local governments and
community institutions in building a coalition facilitating stability and economic
growth. The risk of a complex, challenging institutional setting involving 17 MPAs
will be reduced by additional, qualified staffing and staff incentives. Output-level
risks, such as crop production adversely affected by changing weather patterns,
will be reduced through a number of measures to mitigate the impacts of climate
change. Other risk mitigation measures include: (i) promoting interventions that
are profitable for PTGs; (ii) enhancing communication links for better access to
markets and services; and (iii) ensuring community participation in programme
planning and implementation to ensure community support for the programme and
insulation from the left-wing insurgency.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. The OPELIP is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

supports both strategic objectives of the IFAD RB-COSOP for India. It is also
directed to one of the main target groups identified in the COSOP – indigenous
tribal groups. The programme design adheres to IFAD policies for poverty,
targeting and gender, indigenous peoples, climate change, scaling up, good
governance and the environment. The programme is classified as a category B
operation; thus no further environmental assessment is considered necessary.



EB 2015/114/R.11

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The State Government has been actively involved in formulation and appraisal of

the OPELIP. The programme is built on the success of OTELP as well as on lessons
learned from other IFAD-supported projects in India. The OPELIP is aligned with
the India COSOP 2010-2015 and is compatible with and supportive of other state
government initiatives. It is also in line with strategies and policies of the
Governments of India and Odisha for the development of tribal and vulnerable
communities. The programme goal and objective are aligned with the objective of
“faster and more inclusive growth” of the Governments of Odisha and India.

C. Innovations and scaling up
42. The OPELIP represents a scaling up of the successful interventions of OTELP, and it

is expected that the OPELIP, itself, will be scaled up in time. As this is the first
externally funded development intervention targeted to PTGs, it offers an
opportunity to refine a model for PTG areas, which can then be scaled up to PTG
areas in other states with large PTG populations, such as Jharkhand and
Chhattisgarh.

43. The OPELIP will undertake case studies of innovations and success stories on a
regular basis and will report on them through annual progress reports and in the
India country newsletters.

D. Policy engagement
44. The policy engagement of the programme will support the Government of Odisha’s

efforts to address a number of policy issues relating to the development of tribal
populations. The programme will also provide funding for studies on key policy
issues and dissemination of the findings, and will engage in dialogue with the State
Government on other unresolved policy areas.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A financing agreement between the Republic of India and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

46. The Republic of India is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of India in an amount equivalent to thirty-six million four hundred thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 36,400,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of India
for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation
Project


Republic of India

Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of India

Executing agency: Directorate of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$148.8 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$75.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Cofinancier(s): Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF)
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS)
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY)

Amount of cofinancing: RIDF: US$6.2 million
MGNREGS: US$42 million
RKVY: US$2.4 million

Contribution of borrower: US$13.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.8 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project, as
contained in paragraph 48.

Proposed loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra
Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. India is now the third largest economy in the world, having grown at a robust

7.5 per cent per year between 2004 and 2013. Poverty declined significantly over
the last decade, from 39 per cent in 2005 to 22 percent in 2014. Despite India’s
strong economic growth, poverty remains a major issue, with 23.6 per cent of the
population living on less than US$1.25 per day. India has 33 per cent of the world’s
poor people, and nutritional levels are unacceptably low, with 29.4 per cent of
children underweight.

2. India’s extremely strong agricultural performance in recent decades transformed
the nation from chronic dependence on grain imports into a net exporter of food.
However, as growth in other sectors outstripped that in the agricultural sector, the
latter's share of the national economy declined, now accounting for less than17 per
cent. Still, structural transformation has been slow; agriculture remains the main
livelihood for just over half of the population, and nearly three-quarters of India’s
population depend on rural incomes.

3. In the state of Andhra Pradesh, agriculture is the principal source of livelihood for
over 62 per cent of the population and accounted for 27 per cent of state GDP in
2014/2015. Annual average rainfall is 966 mm. Canals and groundwater are the
major sources of irrigation. Small and marginal farmers account for approximately
80 per cent of agricultural landholders, together cultivating 54 per cent of the
farmland. Rainfed agriculture is practiced on nearly 57 per cent of the net sown
area.

4. In the five districts of the project – Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool and
Prakasam – there are approximately 3 million farmers, 80 per cent of whom are
small and marginal farmers cultivating less than 2 hectares. Agricultural production
is largely based on cash crops – primarily oilseeds (groundnuts) followed by pulses
and cotton. Furthermore, the cattle and buffalo number are declining due to their
replacement by tractors and to increasing shortages of fodder and water. However,
the number of small ruminants is on the rise as they are well adapted to survive
drought. The five project districts have the highest number (12 million) of such
small ruminants in the state. Sheep outnumber goats. However, animal productivity
is low and mortality rates high due to poor access to support services and inputs,
delivery of support being made more difficult by flock migration in search of
seasonal grazing.

5. Less than one fifth of the predominantly rainfed area is irrigated, mainly by
groundwater, with irrigation used for commercial horticulture and some paddy and
dry-season crops, along with supplementary irrigation for rainfed crops.
Groundwater is also used for commercial purposes (e.g. packaged drinking water
and beverages). As a result, groundwater levels are declining and no longer a
reliable source of irrigation for many small farmers. In the districts of Chittoor and
Anantapur, for example, groundwater levels have reached a critical point where
well failure is a common occurrence. Drilling in these districts has become



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

expensive, as average depths reach up to 1,000 feet. As many as 95 per cent of
drilled wells fail or do not yield any water. It is estimated that groundwater
depletion now affects 30 per cent of all mandals/blocks (administrative subdivision of
districts in Andhra Pradesh) in the project area.

6. Soils over most of the project area are thin and have weak water-holding capacity.
Uncertain rainfall means crop areas and yields vary significantly from year to year.
Over the past 20 years in Anantapur district, the area of groundnuts has varied by
a factor of two and yields by a factor of 20 (between 1,310 kg/ha and 67 kg/ha).
Low and unreliable rainfall is an overriding constraint, and irrigation resources are
limited.

7. The risks involved in farming – relating to both rainfall and irrigation – mean that
farmers are finding themselves increasingly in debt. In particular, they are unable
to repay the loans they took to pay for sinking boreholes that produce no water.
This has caused considerable distress, with an increase in suicide among farmers,
especially those who made large investments in commercial horticulture. In the
project area, a wealth-ranking exercise conducted during project design showed
that 51 per cent of rural households were in the poor and poorest categories.

8. The state of Andhra Pradesh is responding to the challenge of drought and
depletion of groundwater by experimenting with a demand-side approach to water
management. Such an approach piloted from 2004 to 2009 the Andhra Pradesh
Farmer Managed Groundwater Systems Project (APFAMGS), implemented by the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in approximately
640 villages demonstrated the following main results: reduction in groundwater
draft; replacement of bananas, rice and cotton by other crops that need less water,
such as peanuts and a locally bred variety of green lentils; replicable as no
authoritative leadership is required for enforcement of water management rules.
Andhra Pradesh authorities decided to replicate demand-side water management in
all drought-prone mandals in the project area through a saturation approach
covering all villages, and both rainfed farmers and farmers using borewells for
irrigation.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

9. The overarching problem the project will address is the low productivity and high
risk of farming in the drought-prone districts of Andhra Pradesh it covers. The
situation is further aggravated by poor access among farmers to information,
especially relating to weather and weather-related decisions (e.g. crop choices,
planting dates, pest and disease control), by the lack of any governance or
management system for water resources specifically limiting new borewell drilling,
by poor farming practices, and by suboptimal use of technology. Hence, the project
will make a concerted and coordinated effort to mitigate the problems of cyclical
drought and enable farmers to increase their incomes despite this very difficult
farming environment. This will be achieved through the adoption of resilient and
better-adapted agriculture; the integration of livestock (sheep and backyard
poultry) to improve the drought resilience of the farming system; better
management of water resources through groundwater-demand management at the
community level and its embedding in local government structures; and rainwater
harvesting and storage, and improved recharge of groundwater aquifers, to make
more water available.

10. The Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project (APDMP) is closely aligned with the
priorities and strategies of the state government of Andhra Pradesh. The Andhra
Pradesh state Strategy Paper for the Primary Sector, produced in 2014 with
assistance from the International Centre for Research in the Semi-Arid Tropics,
places priority on harvesting more rainwater in dry districts and managing scarce
groundwater resources. The Strategy Paper also supports soil health mapping and
increasing organic soil matter, organic farming and the development of horticulture.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

The project objective and outcomes are fully aligned with the Andhra Pradesh state
strategy.

11. With regard to the results-based country strategic opportunities programmes
(COSOP) (extended until 2016), APDMP is fully aligned with the first strategic
objective, increased access to agricultural technologies and natural resources. It is
noteworthy that the 2015 country programme evaluation assessed the relevance of
the COSOP as satisfactory.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area will be located in Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool (the

Rayalaseema region) and Prakasam, the five driest districts of the state of Andhra
Pradesh. The project will be implemented in village clusters that equate to gram
panchayats (GPs), the lowest level of local government in India. The project will
aim to cover 330 GPs, covering a total of 165,000 farming households. The project
will adopt a saturation approach in these GPs by targeting all farmers. In addition,
APDMP will engage with clusters of GPs that belong to the same drainage basin: the
river drainage basin together with the underlying groundwater define hydrological
units (HUs). Each HU includes on average five GPs.

13. The project target group will include all categories of farmers and landless people,
including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and vulnerable households, such
as women-headed households. Gender equity will be mainstreamed in project
activities. The project will adopt a two-step targeting strategy. First, the project will
adopt geographic targeting by focusing on the worst drought-affected villages in
the poorest mandals. Secondly, the project will adopt a social targeting approach.
Andhra Pradesh state has requested that the project ensure support is provided to
the 100 poorest households in each GP.

B. Project development objective
14. The overall project goal is to improve the incomes of approximately 165,000

farming households and strengthen their resilience to drought. This goal will be
achieved through the development objective of strengthening the adaptive capacity
and productivity of agriculture in the rainfed zones of five districts in southern
Andhra Pradesh state.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project will comprise three components: (i) climate-resilient production

systems; (ii) drought-proofing through natural resource management and
governance; and (iii) project management and lesson learning.

16. Component 1: Climate-resilient production systems aims to increase the
resilience of crop and livestock production systems to climate change (specifically
drought) and provide farmers (individuals and small groups) with information to
make informed decisions on how to invest in protective irrigation, improve soil
fertility practices, diversify cropping systems and improve their livestock
productivity. Accordingly, component 1 will involve three subcomponents:

(i) Improved crop production systems through support to farmer information
centres, farmer field schools and the promotion of integrated soil fertility
management and protective irrigation.

(ii) Improved livestock production systems through support to community
livestock facilitators providing fee-based services to sheep producers
(improved housing, feeding and breeding) and a backyard poultry scheme
targeted at the poorest women.

(iii) Strengthened farmers’ organizations through a flexible approach, working
with existing organizations where possible and forming new organizations
where needed to support farmers through input supply, seed multiplication,
production services, machinery-hire centres and marketing support.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

17. Component 2: Drought-proofing through natural resource management
and governance aims to mitigate drought and make agriculture more productive
by managing and investing in common property resources. Component 2’s
objective will be achieved through the following three subcomponents:

(i) Water governance will support water planning and supply and demand
management through water subcommittees at the GP level, which will form
hydrological unit networks (HUNs) that will operate at the drainage basin level
to further optimize investments in the conservation of surface water and
groundwater. Training and workshops will build local capacity and support the
development of surface water and groundwater planning and monitoring.

(ii) Water monitoring and conservation will cover local hydrological and
meteorological monitoring to support local decision-making and planning for
water resources as well as collaboration between GP water subcommittees
and HUNs and relevant administrations involved in water supply and demand
monitoring. A pilot hydrological mapping of aquifers is proposed to
complement available knowledge and information on groundwater. Soil and
water conservation activities will support the recharge of soil moisture and
groundwater, and geographically targeted water-harvesting activities will
complement local water supply management.

(iii) Regeneration of common property rangeland will support vegetative methods
for water conservation and strengthen community management of grazing,
rainwater harvesting and other environmental services.

18. Component 3: Management and lesson learning will see the establishment of a
state project management unit (SPMU) at the Andhra Pradesh state level and of a
district project management unit (DPMU) in each of the five districts. Lesson
learning will cover water resource planning and management, drought-resilient
agriculture and climate change adaptation, and the development of policies for the
crop and livestock sectors, especially for small ruminants.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

19. The project will build on and scale up a number of current and recent initiatives for
farming in a drought-prone environment. These include the APFAMGS, mentioned
above, and state-led soil and water conservation works with the objective of
harvesting rainfall and recharging aquifers. In addition, APDMP will incorporate
aspects of a number of programmes of the Andhra Pradesh state Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), including community seed multiplication, millet
production, groundwater sharing, rainfed farming, and farmer producer
organizations (FPOs). APDMP will also capitalize on innovations in plant breeding for
drought tolerance, soil fertility management, farm ponds to store water for
protective irrigation, and community management of common property rangeland.

B. Organizational framework
20. At the Andhra Pradesh state level, the DAC will be the nodal agency, the

Directorate of Agriculture will be the lead project agency and host the SPMU. The
Director of Agriculture will serve as ex officio project director. The Agricultural
Technology Management Agency (ATMA) will implement the project at the district
level. ATMA is an autonomous government agency responsible for extension
services with a mandate for multisectoral support including livestock and
horticulture. To implement APDMP, the capacity of ATMA will be strengthened
through PMUs with additional staff. A lead technical agency (LTA) will be contracted
to advise the SPMU on planning, capacity-building, monitoring, documentation and
information technology services. To support implementation at the field level,
facilitating agencies (FAs) will be hired to: (i) carry out participatory planning at the
community level; (ii) form and support FPOs and the GP water subcommittees and
HUNs; (iii) organize farmer field schools and other extension provision capacity-



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

building; and (iv) monitor implementation, including oversight of financial
expenditure by FPOs.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. Planning. A draft annual workplan and budget (AWPB) will be consolidated by the
SPMU with inputs from the DPMUs and other entities such as LTA and FAs. Each
DPMU will consolidate proposals made by project GPs or FPOs. The AWPB will then
be approved by the project steering committee and submitted to IFAD for approval
by 31 January every year.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, guided
by an M&E framework set out in the project implementation manual (PIM), will
collect data and information to measure performance and progress towards
objectives; serve as a learning tool to provide information for critical reflection on
project strategies and operations; support decision-making at various levels; and
serve as a basis for results-based management. Responsibility for overall M&E and
reporting will lie with the additional project director and the planning and
monitoring manager in the SPMU. The LTA M&E unit will assist in conducting
outcome and impact monitoring, and preparing consolidated reports on project
progress and results.

23. Learning and knowledge management. In line with IFAD policy, learning and
knowledge management will be key elements of APDMP, through an integrated
approach whereby M&E will feed in to generating learning for the project and from
the project. The LTA will prepare a knowledge management strategy, building on
IFAD’s knowledge management strategy, during the first year of project
implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. In order to ensure the effective and efficient financial

management of APDMP, in addition to finance staff seconded by the state
government of Andhra Pradesh in charge of the management of all disbursements
via the Single Treasury Account (STS) and the personal deposit accounts, the SPMU
will recruit a finance officer and a finance support officer locally. The finance officer
will be responsible for the preparation of consolidated interim financial reports
(IFRs), the preparation of project's financial statements, the review of financial
reports and audits of FAs, and a number of internal control and administrative
organizational activities. The PIM will detail sound internal control procedures to be
followed in the daily administration of the project, at the central and district levels
alike. The financial management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk
as high, and the measures described above would mitigate this risk.

25. At the district level, in each ATMA district office, an accounting officer will be
recruited locally to manage financial resources received from the SPMU and prepare
the related financial reports. S/he will be supported by an accounts assistant
seconded from DAC or other another government department.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD financing will be channelled through a designated account
denominated in United States dollars to be opened at the Reserve Bank of India
and administered by the Office of Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit. IFAD will
establish an authorized allocation for initial advance in a maximum amount of US$3
million. The SPMU will use the State Treasury System for all its disbursements.
Funds flow arrangements foresee an extensive use of the state/country systems;
transfers from the state to the districts shall be done using the STS and Personal
Deposit (PD) accounts. Additional PD accounts shall be opened for each ATMA as
authorized by the State. Disbursements to the LTA and to all other FAs will be
managed at the SPMU level, while procedures for district office disbursements will
be detailed in the PIM.

27. The ATMA DPMUs will submit monthly financial reports to the SPMU based on the
actual expenditures incurred. The SPMU will consolidate the district expenditures



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and its own and report quarterly consolidated IFRs, subject to audit certification at
the end of each financial year.

28. For the preparation of IFRs, withdrawal applications and financial reports, the STS
reporting facility will be supplemented by an accounting software procured on the
market and deployed in the SPMU and all district offices.

29. Audit. The State shall request the Accountant General of Andhra Pradesh (AG-AP)
to conduct annual audits of APDMP. The AG-AP will perform a “certification audit”
for externally financed projects, including a number of specific activities such as
audits of the project’s financial statements, of the IFRs submitted to IFAD, of
APDMP treasury transactions and the District ATMA Societies. AG-AP will issue
separate opinions covering each of the financial statements, IFRs and the use of the
STS and commercial banking system. The audited financial statements and audit
report, including the management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within six
months following the end of each financial year. Simultaneously, the statutory
annual audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor, empanelled with AG-AP.
The State confirmed that empanelled auditors will have full access to STS for
auditing purposes.

30. Retroactive financing. With a view to ensuring APDMP preparatory activities
proceed smoothly, activities related to baseline and land surveys, and to the
preparation of the PIM, manuals and guidelines are proposed between September
2016 and the date of entry into force of the financing agreement. Accordingly, as
an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, it is
recommended that IFAD retroactive financing be approved for expenditures
totalling up to US$1 million. These proposed expenditures will fall under three
expenditure categories: (i) consultancies; (ii) goods services and inputs; and
(iii) salaries and allowances. The expenditures incurred will be reimbursed to the
borrower after the project enters into force.

31. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services under APDMP financed
from resources provided or administered by IFAD will be conducted in accordance
with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Handbook, 2010. Procurement will be
undertaken in accordance with a consolidated procurement plan submitted by the
SPMU, approved by the Project Steering Committee and acceptable to IFAD.

32. Governance. As part of the robust e-governance policy and framework of the state
government of Andhra Pradesh, the SPMU will disclose the following minimum
documents either via the project web site or that of the Directorate of Agriculture:
(i) a procurement plan any revisions thereto; (ii) a procurement manual;
(iii) invitations for bids for goods and works for all national competitive bidding
contracts; (iv) request for expression of interest for selection/recruitment of
consulting services; iv) contract awards of goods, works and all consultancy
services; (v) list of contracts following direct contracting or single source selection;
(vi) shortlist of consultants, (vii) contract award of all consultancy services; and
(viii) reports of action taken on any complaints received. In addition, the SPMU will
disclose relevant information related to government funds as specified by the Right
to Information Act and the decisions of the State Information Commissioner
applicable to project implementation.

E. Supervision
33. IFAD will directly supervise the project, supporting project start-up and conducting

annual field supervision missions to review progress towards physical targets,
compliance with fiduciary responsibilities and follow-up on audit recommendations
and produce agreed actions to further enhance performance. IFAD and the Andhra
Pradesh state government will undertake a first main review no later than 24
months following the date of entry into force of the financing agreement, to be
followed by a midterm review within the subsequent 18 months.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
34. Total project costs are estimated at US$148.8 million over a five-year period,

including overall physical and price contingencies. Key assumptions in this estimate
include: (i) price contingencies of 5 per cent applied on all items; (ii) an exchange
rate of 70 Indian Rupees to one United States dollar; and (iii) taxes and duties of
12.5 per cent on works and 5 per cent on goods, inputs and services.

B. Project financing
35. Project financing will comprise, approximately: US$75.5 million, or 50.7 per cent of

total project costs, from IFAD; US$6.2 million from the Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF); US$42 million from the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); US$2.4 million from the Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY); US$13.9 million equivalents in government counterpart
financcing, including taxes and duties and salaries of seconded staff; and US$8.8
million equivalents from beneficiaries. Taxes and duties account for US$5.4 million
equivalents.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan GoAP* NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Climate-resilient
production systems 65 583 59 10 814 9.7 18 915 17 5 463 5 2 447 2.2 8 363 7.1 111 584
2. Drought-proofing
through natural
resource
management and
governance 5 809 19 835 2.7 23 108 74.8 717 2 - 455 1.5 30 925
3. Management and
lesson learning 4 108 65 2 225 35 - - - - 6 333

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 14 842

* GoAP - State Government of Andhra Pradesh.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
Category

IFAD loan GoAP NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Works 2 386 6.9 2 325 6.7 28 790 83.1 611 2 - - 541 1.3 34 653
Training 5 253 99.9 6 0.1 - - - - - 5 259
Consultancies 18 690 85.6 3 132 14.4 - - - - - 21 821
Goods, services
and inputs 45 084 56.1 6 363 7.9 13 233 16.5 4 938 6 2 447 3 8 276 10.5 80 341
Grants and
subsidies 1 921 73.3 70 2.7 - - 631 24 - - - - 2 621
Salaries and
allowances 2 166 52.2 1980 47.8 - - - - - - - - 4 146

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 148 842

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. Investments under the project will have an overall economic internal rate of return

of 19 per cent and the net present value (discount rate at 10 per cent) remains
over 10 per cent if costs increase by 20 per cent or benefits decrease by 20 per
cent. Benefits have been calculated based on two cropping system farm models
(red soils and black soils, each for an average farm size of 1.62 ha), reflecting the
different cropping patterns on these soil types. Sensitivity analysis confirms that
the project would remain moderately robust to decreases in benefits and increases
in costs alike.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

37. The project is expected to benefit a total of approximately 643,500 people through
165,000 farming households.

D. Sustainability
38. Project interventions will be sustainable. Improved agricultural practices, if found

by farmers to be useful and profitable, will be sustained, provided inputs and
markets are available. Many of the support services that the project will establish
can be operated as businesses by individuals or small informal groups.

39. Groundwater demand management will be sustained as water subcommittees are
embedded in the GP local government structure. It will also be important to sustain
groundwater-sharing networks, and provision has been made to establish a user
maintenance fund. Likewise, farm ponds will need require maintenance (desilting
and linings repairs), and entrusting the responsibility for this to the pond owner(s)
directly will contribute to strengthening their sense of ownership.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
40. There are a number of risks associated with the project, as detailed in the logical

framework. A significant risk at the development objective level is that of climate
change and increasing labour costs, further hindering the capacity of farming in the
rainfed areas of southern Andhra Pradesh to compete with other parts of India with
higher rainfall. This relates to the high climate change risk rating for the project,
which will be mitigated by increasing the productivity and the resilience to climate
change of rainfed agriculture. Should rainfed agriculture continues to face
difficulties in competing, then activities can be refocused towards more resilient
livestock and limited areas of irrigated horticulture. The risks associated with
drought-proofing via natural resource management and governance will be
mitigated by, among other support, building strong community ownership for local
groundwater demand management, reinforced by legal sanctions. The financial
management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk as high.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

41. The project is fully aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025) and
adheres to IFAD policies for targeting and gender mainstreaming, environment and
natural resource management, climate change and social, environmental and
climate assessment. Since the project is classified as a category B operation, no
further environmental assessment is considered necessary. The climate risk
classification is deemed to be high.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
42. The state Government has been actively involved in the formulation and appraisal

of the APDMP. The project, built on the alignment with existing government
structures of DAC and ATMA, will be dynamic and flexible. The proposed
arrangement is based on the current assessment of project needs and may be
modified should further requirements arise during implementation.

Innovations and scaling upC.
43. The project will seek to scale up and improve on experience in Andhra Pradesh

state of groundwater management in order to provide a holistic and integrated
response to the multifaceted and complex acute drought situation facing many
districts. The project will expand and adapt the participatory hydrological
monitoring programme of APFAMGS, implemented with the assistance of FAO, and
combine it with groundwater water-sharing and water supply investments from
public and private funds. Comprehensive M&E, together with special studies, will
generate detailed information on the process and results of project implementation.
These will bring together lessons learned and collect more information to help
formulate future strategies and support additional convergence.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Policy engagementD.
44. The project will generate knowledge on water management and water use

efficiency that will inform future policies at state level. The proposed hydrological
survey under component 2 will contribute to decisions regarding groundwater
exploitation, recharge and management, and the findings will be reflected in the GP
and HU management plans and shared with the concerned line departments. The
experience of community water management involving GPs and water resource
planning at the GP and HU levels will also inform state strategies regarding water
resource planning and management, and conservation of groundwater resources.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A project financing agreement between the Republic of India and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A project agreement will be entered into between the state of Andhra
Pradesh and IFAD. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

46. The Republic of India is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of India in an amount equivalent to seventy-five million five hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$75,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Indonesia for the
Integrated Participatory Development and
Management of the Irrigation Project

Republic of Indonesia

Integrated Participatory Development and Management
of the Irrigation Project

Financing summary

Initiating institutions: International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
and Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Borrower: Republic of Indonesia

Executing agency: Directorate General of Water Resources (DGWR),
Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MoPWH)

Total project cost: US$802.4 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 93.15 million
(equivalent to approximately US$98.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 1.41 million
(equivalent to approximately US$1.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 6 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$600 million

Terms of cofinancing: Loan

Contribution of borrower: US$102.4 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Indonesia for the Integrated Participatory Development
and Management of the Irrigation Project, as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Indonesia for
the Integrated Participatory Development and
Management of the Irrigation Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Indonesia has made significant progress in reducing poverty and promoting

economic growth. Agriculture remains an important sector as a pathway for rural
transformation and poverty reduction. Yet Indonesian farmers face new threats
from volatile food prices, erratic agricultural markets and policies, growing
insecurity of access to land, degradation of natural resources and the worsening
effects of climate change. Ensuring inclusive economic development through
strengthened agriculture-sector performance is a key priority for the Government of
Indonesia, which has recently prioritized issues of food sovereignty and rural
development. Food security is challenged by a declining rural infrastructure – a
consequence of inadequate financing and delivery of operations and maintenance
(O&M) that limits increased productivity for rice and other high-value crops. High
transport and logistics costs are a serious constraint on business operations and
undermine the competitiveness of agricultural value chains. In addition, increased
higher-value cropping and commercialized agriculture are needed to improve rural
livelihoods. Technical and administrative capacity constraints hamper effective
planning, management and development as Indonesia’s decentralized government
structure heightens capacity challenges. Climate change is expected to further
worsen water scarcity in some areas, result in more-frequent extreme weather
events and less-favourable rainfall patterns for agriculture. It is recognized that
improved integration of irrigation management and agricultural development is
needed if the country is to achieve the desired impact on food security and rural
livelihoods.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. As part of its National Medium-Term Development Plan 2015-2019, the
Government aims at self-sufficiency in key staple foods, including rice, by 2017. In
support of this target, it has committed to rehabilitating 3.2 million hectares (ha) of
degraded irrigation systems to enhance rice and other food production. This has
placed considerable focus on agriculture and water, with calls for both the public
and private sectors to consider comprehensive and collaborative responses to
national development targets. Earlier attempts to enhance the productivity of
irrigated agriculture through a largely infrastructural focus have achieved
suboptimal longer-term results, mainly owing to: (i) failure to empower farmers
and strengthen a farming system response that maximized their opportunities to
capture sustainable economic benefits from infrastructure investments; and (ii)
failure to ensure that all parts of the new or rehabilitated irrigated schemes were
well maintained.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

2

3. The project builds on these lessons and on learning from previous and ongoing
investments in irrigated agriculture. It is strongly aligned with government policies
and expenditure plans.

4. The Integrated Participatory Development and Management of the Irrigation Project
(IPDMIP) will significantly contribute to achievement of government priorities to: (i)
increase rice production for food security; (ii) develop higher-value cropping to
improve rural nutrition and livelihoods; and (iii) promote more productive irrigation
infrastructure and its sustainable management through the delivery of an
integrated package of infrastructure, institutional reforms and capacity
development to catalyse sector advances. Importantly, the project will complement
– and provide a robust framework for promoting – more-effective public and private
investment in irrigated agriculture.

5. By integrating a focus on irrigation rehabilitation into strengthened support for
agricultural and farmer livelihood development, the project provides an innovative
approach to investing in irrigated agriculture. It will introduce strengthened
mechanisms to promote more-effective cross-sectoral coordination and institutional
and policy development.

6. IPDMIP is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, the current
interim country strategy and the forthcoming results-based country strategic
opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for Indonesia (April 2016), which will focus
on productivity enhancement, market access and institution- and capacity-building
for rural women and men.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. Project area. The proposed project area will cover an initial 16 provinces

(5 in Sumatra, 4 in Java, 2 in Kalimantan, 3 in Sulawesi and 2 in Nusa Tenggara),
comprising 74 districts and up to 1,800 irrigation schemes, covering a total area of
some 450,000 ha (approximately 14 per cent of the 3.2 million ha national target).
Importantly, it will pursue a scaling-up strategy to promote the replication of
project activities in other villages in the targeted districts and in other districts and
provinces. It is estimated that the project model could be replicated in
approximately 10,000 subprojects covering some 2.2 million ha. This would
increase potential coverage to 6 million households or some 24 million individuals.

8. Target group. The project design adopts an inclusive targeting approach at the
irrigation scheme level to benefit all active farmers in the scheme. Within targeted
communities, categories of poor rural people consist of poor, near-poor and
better-off people. An explicit poverty and targeting strategy will be employed to
reach the most marginal households, including ‘poor people’ (i.e. moderately poor,
poor and very poor people), women, youth and those farmers at the tail end of the
irrigation schemes, who are normally the most vulnerable. The total number of
project beneficiaries is estimated at 900,000 households or 4 million individuals, of
whom approximately 50 per cent are women.

B. Project development objective
9. The goal of the project is to improve food security and livelihoods in rural

Indonesia. Its outcome objective is to increase the value and sustainability of
irrigated agriculture.

C. Components
10. Component 1. Increased irrigated agriculture incomes will focus on improving

farm and market systems and on providing appropriate service support, including
financial services, mainly for rice and high-value irrigated crops.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

3

(a) Subcomponent 1.1. Improved farm productivity and services focuses
on on-farm activities and comprises: support to improved farmer extension
services available to smallholder farmers; farmer-to-farmer knowledge
dissemination; access to and storage of sufficient good-quality seed and other
inputs; and mechanization, including support for enhancing on-farm systems
for crop intensification and diversification and ensuring that farmers acquire
the necessary knowledge, skills and confidence to adopt improved agronomy
and better risk-management practices.

(b) Subcomponent 1.2. Improved market access and services focuses on
promoting better value addition and post-harvest activities and comprises
facilitating public and private investment through combined funding
instruments, supported by consultation platforms and capacity development
initiatives for rice, vegetables and technology access. For rice, support will be
provided to improve post-harvest activities and value addition. For
vegetables, support will build on existing and emerging production clusters,
following an iterative process to facilitate and develop links between buyers,
producers and service providers. It will prioritize innovation in local value
chains and actively promote development of local private-sector markets. As
with subcomponent 1.1, initiatives will be taken to encourage partnership
with private input suppliers.

(c) Subcomponent 1.3. Improved financial access and use of services is
based on facilitating better access to and leveraging mainstream financial
services. It will include savings, credit and, subsequently, other innovative
rural financial services (e.g. digital financial services and agriculture
microinsurance) by sustainable financial service providers, enabling seasonal
finance needs to be met through inclusive and pro-poor services. The
approach will build on existing structures and will develop partnerships with a
small number of existing financial service providers that demonstrate a clear
social inclusion performance and business strategy in expanding their
smallholder agricultural portfolio, and that have existing, proven financial
service schemes broadly aligned with the project’s objectives and aspirations
for rural financial services.

11. Component 2. Improved irrigation systems infrastructure will focus on
support to rehabilitation or upgrading of primary and secondary irrigation systems
and drainage infrastructure, and will include modernization of these systems for
one or several larger schemes.

(a) Subcomponent 2.1. Preparatory assessments comprises: activities to
provide reliable information regarding water availability in the basin, in
relation to the needs of the irrigation scheme – to be taken into account to
ensure that the scheme has adequate water to meet irrigation requirements;
and participatory rapid rural assessments, pre-design and drafting of overall
scheme intervention plans. Hydrological assessments will also take into
account the possible impacts of climate change.

(b) Subcomponent 2.2. Irrigation systems rehabilitation, upgrading
and/or modernization comprises activities to design and implement civil
works with respect to irrigation and drainage infrastructure. Detailed
engineering designs for civil works will cover primary and secondary irrigation
infrastructure, tertiary irrigation infrastructure and drainage works. To
address the water/food/energy nexus, the project will equip irrigation canals
with hydropower turbines – on a pilot basis – for management by WUAs
where technically, economically and institutionally feasible.

12. Component 3. Improved irrigation systems management will focus on
strengthening irrigation water delivery at the scheme level.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

4

(a) Subcomponent 3.1. Empowerment of WUAs comprises activities to
facilitate the organization of irrigating farmers into empowered WUAs/WUAFs
capable of investing in and managing tertiary irrigation infrastructure, to
ensure adequate water supply and access to all farmers in the tertiary
irrigation scheme. Specifically, this will support training and capacity-building
of WUAs/WUAFs at the institutional level. Institutional support activities will
establish, reorganize and complete the WUA organizational structures in the
targeted irrigation systems, following government policy and procedure and
introducing the lessons of international experiences. This will also include
legal registration of WUAs/WUAFs, development of by-laws by their members,
appointment of board members and assignment of roles and responsibilities
in agreement with all involved farmers.

(b) Subcomponent 3.2. Improvement of irrigation systems field
management comprises activities to support central, provincial and district
governments in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of irrigation water
management through activities such as: irrigation system performance
assessments; preparation of irrigation management plans and irrigation
service plans; volumetric discharge measurement and water accounting;
improvement of irrigation service performance; needs-based planning and
budgeting; and refurbishment of existing offices, equipment and facilities
within the context of the preparation of O&M. To achieve sustainable
improvement of irrigation system performance, this will include establishment
and start-up assistance to irrigation management units (IMUs) for selected
irrigation schemes under the project.

(c) Subcomponent 3.3. Operationalization of a national asset
management system comprises activities in support of operationalizing
such a system, including aerial surveys – using remote sensing technology –
of primary, secondary, tertiary and other infrastructure, as well as
hydrological and agricultural data. These data will also be used to further
inform hydrological assessments under subcomponent 2.1 and to assist
project management and implementation under subcomponent 4.4.

13. Component 4. Strengthened policy and institutional frameworks for
irrigated agriculture will focus on: (a) strengthening the capacity of government
institutions and staff; and (b) supporting executing and implementing institutions at
national and provincial levels in undertaking overall project supervision. Improving
coordination among the different government institutions will be an important
element of these aspects.

(a) Subcomponent 4.1. Strengthened local-level policy, regulatory and
institutional framework comprises: supporting government line agencies
at provincial and district levels in identifying specific policy issues and
reflecting on how these could be tackled; supporting Badan Perencanaan
Pembangunan Daerah (BAPPEDA), the provincial and district planning agency,
in undertaking analysis and synthesis of knowledge from various sources and
in informing policy dialogue; and supporting both the line agencies and
BAPPEDAs in identifying policy options and actions.

(b) Subcomponent 4.2. Establishment of water resource management
and knowledge centres. Sixteen such centres will be established or
strengthened at the provincial level – including through recruitment of
personnel and procurement of office and training equipment and facilities –
for training on technical and institutional aspects of irrigation planning,
development and management.

(c) Subcomponent 4.3. Improved policy coordination for irrigated
agriculture comprises support for establishing and supporting a knowledge
management centre (KMC) in the National Development Planning Agency



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

5

(BAPPENAS), which will coordinate support for smallholder irrigated
agriculture, promote policy dialogue among domestic stakeholders and
strengthen national and local policy processes. The KMC’s remit would be
related to knowledge management and policy development, enabling the
Government to: foster continuity between development projects and policies
for smallholder irrigated agriculture by drawing out lessons; unify knowledge
from diverse initiatives; promote coordinated approaches to policy dialogue
among domestic stakeholders; and support national and local policy
processes.

(d) Subcomponent 4.4. Project management and implementation support
comprises support to executing and implementing agencies (EA and IAs) at
national and provincial levels in undertaking overall project supervision and
strengthening the planning, implementation and management capacities of
IAs.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. The project adopts a menu-based programmatic approach: identifying and
packaging a strategic set of interventions in order to achieve the desired outcomes
and development objectives. Menu items will essentially consist of the
subcomponents and activities attributed to each output.

15. The implementation approach builds on the recently completed Asian Development
Bank (ADB) supported Participatory Irrigation Sector Project. Adjustments have
been made based on lessons learned from ADB’s and IFAD’s project implementation
experiences in Indonesia. These seek to strengthen linkages between agriculture
and the irrigation rehabilitation interventions, to strengthen poverty targeting, and
to respond to the need to expedite project implementation, with a view towards
contributing to national development targets for agriculture and for irrigation
rehabilitation.

B. Organizational framework
16. The National Steering Committee on Water Resources (NSCWR), chaired by the

Deputy Minister of Maritime and Natural Resources, Ministry of National
Development Planning/BAPPENAS, will be responsible for the overall coordination of
the project. The Directorate General of Water Resources (DGWR) in the Ministry of
Public Works and Housing (MoPWH) will be the executing agency. A national project
management unit (NPMU) will be established under the Directorate of Irrigation and
Lowland in DGWR to ensure overall coordination of implementation of the project. A
total of four national project implementation units (NPIUs) will be established: one
in the Directorate of Irrigation and Swamps (DoIS) in DGWR, responsible for
implementation of the irrigation infrastructure systems and related activities; one in
DoIS, responsible for implementation of O&M-related activities; one in the
Directorate General of Regional Development in the Ministry of Home Affairs
(MoHA), responsible for overall guidance of the BAPPEDAs; and one in the Agency
for Agricultural Extension and Human Resources Development (AAEHRD) in the
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), responsible for implementation of agricultural and
related activities, in cooperation with provincial and district agriculture agencies.
The IFAD grant will be administered by the Ministry of National Development
Planning/BAPPENAS.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

17. Planning. The NPMU, in consultation with the NPIUs, will prepare and submit an
overall annual workplan, showing supporting (general) and subproject activities, to



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

6

ADB and IFAD for review and no objection. In addition, each participating district
and province will prepare an overall work plan and budget.

18. Monitoring and evaluation. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) will serve three
distinct functions strengthening management, accountability and learning. A project
performance monitoring system will consolidate the M&E functions into a unified
system. Building on lessons learned under the IFAD-supported Coastal Community
Development Project (CCDP), it will comprise both a comprehensive list of
performance indicators at impact, outcome, output and suboutput levels, derived
from the project Design and Monitoring Framework (appendix II), and impact and
post-completion performance data. Data will be disaggregated by component and,
where possible, by district, gender and other dimensions. The indicators used will
include those contributing to IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). The project will undertake baseline, midterm and impact studies and
conduct annual outcome surveys.

19. Learning. The M&E system will also seek to inform on issues that can improve the
relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of the project. The M&E unit, in collaboration
with the NPMU and other key project stakeholders, will identify specific topics that
need particular analysis – technical, institutional and policy-derived – and will
conduct snapshot studies. For each study topic, a learning plan will be developed to
ensure that the study feeds into a larger process of reflection at the project level
and, where appropriate, beyond.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The NPMU will be responsible for the overall consolidation

and coordination of project financial reporting and audit. The four NPIUs will be
responsible for financial management of expenditures under the respective project
components and/or activities. The roles and responsibilities of the implementing
entities will be clearly defined in the project implementation manual.

21. Financial management implementation arrangements will be aligned to national
public financial management (PFM) systems, which have been strengthened in
recent years. PFM modernization initiatives include an integrated financial
management information system, consolidation of the Treasury single account,
government accounting and reporting, strengthened audit institutions, accrual
accounting and adoption of international accounting and auditing standards. A
financial management assessment of the project has been prepared in accordance
with IFAD and ADB’s guidelines for financial management of projects. This
assessment finds that the overall project financial management risk is moderate,
and identifies mitigating actions, including strengthening financial management
capacity at all levels (EA, IAs and PIUs) in terms of staff training and technical
assistance, automated accounting systems, and internal and external audits.

22. Flow of funds. Donor funding will flow through three designated accounts
managed by the Ministry of Finance for the IFAD loan, IFAD grant and ADB loan
respectively. Three types of disbursement mechanisms will be adopted for the
project, consisting of: (i) replenishments of both the IFAD and ADB designated
accounts; (ii) reimbursement of prefinanced expenditures by both IFAD and ADB;
and (iii) direct payments.

23. Flow of funds for the project will be determined by the implementation strategies
adopted by IAs. These will consist of a combination of: (i) reimbursement from
Anggaran Pendapatan dan Belanja Negara (the national revenue and budget
agency) funded activities, which would then be passed on to local governments
through the deconcentration mechanism (Dekonsentrasi/Tugas Pembantuan); and
(ii) reimbursement for activities implemented under prefinancing agreements.

24. Audit. Internal audits will be conducted by the internal audit units of IAs, in
accordance with their mandate and annual workplans. As regards external audit



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

7

arrangements, the consolidated project accounts, prepared by the NPMU, will be
audited by the national auditor, in accordance with international standards for
these institutions. Audited project financial statements will be submitted to IFAD
and ADB within six months of the end of each fiscal year, in line with IFAD and ADB
audit guidelines. The audit reports will provide opinions, for IFAD and ADB funding
respectively, on the financial statements, use of designated accounts, statements of
expenditure and financing agreement covenants. The audit report will include a
management letter assessing the project’s internal control framework at diverse
implementing levels and making recommendations for improvement. The resolution
of audit observations will be monitored by the NPMU, the NPIUs and the national
auditor.

25. Procurement. The procurement of goods and works for IFAD financing will be
undertaken in accordance with the borrower/recipient procurement regulations to
the extent they are consistent with IFAD's Procurement Guidelines.

26. Governance. In line with their respective policies, IFAD and ADB will investigate,
directly or through their agents, any violations of the anticorruption policy relating
to the project. All contracts shall include provisions specifying the right of ADB and
IFAD to audit and examine the records and accounts of the EA and all project
contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers.

27. In addition, ADB’s accountability mechanism and IFAD's complaints procedure
provide independent processes through which people adversely affected by
ADB- and IFAD-assisted projects can voice and seek resolution of their problems,
as well as report alleged violations of ADB’s and IFAD's operational policies and
procedures.

28. Supervision. Supervision will be undertaken by IFAD in collaboration with ADB. A
formal supervision plan covering the period up to the midterm review will be agreed
upon at project start-up. In addition, IFAD will adopt a continuous supervision and
implementation support approach through the newly opened country office. An
extensive review will be carried out after two years of project implementation.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The project is estimated to cost US$802.4 million, including physical and price

contingencies of US$49.17 million.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan IFAD grant ADB Borrower Total

1. Increased irrigated agriculture
incomes 97 473 97 473

2. Improved irrigation systems
infrastructure 434 592 434 592

3. Improved irrigation systems
management 1 038 85 448 156 86 642

4. Strengthened policy and institutional
frameworks for irrigated agriculture 1 489 79 960 102 265 183 714

Total project cost 98 511 1 489 600 000 102 421 802 421

Interest during implementation 49 917 49 917

Commitment charges 524 524

Total disbursement 98 511 1 489 600 000 152 862 852 862



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

8

B. Project financing
30. The Government has requested financing of US$100 million from IFAD, consisting

of a loan of US$98.5 million and a grant of US$1.5 million. The IFAD loan and grant
will finance component 1 and some activities under components 3 and 4. The
Government has further requested a loan of US$600 million from ADB’s ordinary
capital resources. The ADB loan will finance components 2, 3 and 4. The
Government contribution to project costs is estimated at US$102.4 million.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant ADB Borrower Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 362 805 100 362 805
2. Vehicles and equipment 4 663 5 150 10 14 991 3 19 804
3. Consulting services - international 2 709 3 3 798 1 6 374
4. Consulting services - national 18 154 19 361 24 44 586 7 63 231
5. Term staff 5 342 5 5 342
6. Service contract 1 038 1 10 141 2 11 179
7. Workshop, training, socialization 29 014 30 271 18 36 956 6 66 243
8. Survey and studies 777 1 327 22 101 032 17 102 136
9. Institutional capacity-building 13 293 2 13 293
10. Safeguard/land

acquisition/resettlement 1 260 0.2 1 260
11. Incremental administration cost 380 26 11 139 2 102 421 100 113 940
12. Materials 15 297 16 15 297
13. Finance and credit 21 516 22 21 516

Total project cost 98 511 12 1 489 0.2 600 000 75 102 421 13 802 421
Interest during implementation 49 917 100 49 917
Commitment charges 524 100 524

Total disbursement 98 511 12 1 489 0.2 600 000 70 152 862 18 852 862

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
31. Benefits. Benefits would accrue from: (i) improved extension delivery; (ii) use of

improved seed; (iii) adoption of better water management techniques; (iv) access
to mechanization; (v) access to finance; (vi) enhanced access to and more-reliable
irrigation; and (vii) enhanced productivity in agriculture. Yet, in addition to on-farm
investments, higher returns are also generated by other important factors,
including: (i) an improved tertiary irrigation system; (ii) more-functional WUAs;
(iii) improved access to farm roads; and (iv) farmer training in water budgeting and
in financial literacy.

32. Economic analysis. The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the
project is estimated at 17 per cent for the base case. The net present value of the
net benefit stream, discounted at 10 per cent, is 4,944 billion Indonesian rupiah.
The EIRR was subject to sensitivity analysis to measure the impact variations in key
variables due to unforeseen factors. The results indicate that the most significant of
these risks would be overestimation of the achievable with-project rice yields or a
two-year (or more) delay in achieving project benefits. The former is considered a
low risk, as the yield potential is well known for available rice varieties genetically
superior to the varieties normally used by farmers at present. The latter will only be
a risk if there are delays once the project has started, and mitigation measures are
already being implemented to ensure a timely achievement of project benefits.

D. Sustainability
33. Sustainability of the project’s results is based on: (i) impact of capacity-building

activities on the formation of social and human capital among the identified target



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

9

groups (farmer groups and government officials); (ii) impact on relevant policy
frameworks and compilation of knowledge stock within the Government; (iii) the
demand-driven nature of the intervention; and (iv) linkages built among different
actors within the value chain.

34. Moreover, the project has an explicit scaling-up strategy to enhance the impact and
sustainability of achieved results.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. Although this is a very large and geographically dispersed project, its overall

premise is simple. The main risk of lack of support by the Government is reduced,
given the close alignment of project activities with national development priorities.
Already, prior to implementation, stakeholders across government agencies are
collaborating closely in preparing project implementation. The risk of lack of
coordination among stakeholders and limited understanding of project activities is
thus considered manageable. Assessments with regard to risks related to financial
management and procurement have been conducted and mitigation measures
identified. Environmental risks have been identified as manageable. The project
approach includes an additional mechanism to assess and mitigate risks at the
localized, subproject level.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. The project design adheres to relevant IFAD policies for microfinance,
private-sector participation, the environment, targeting and gender. The project is
categorized as environmental category B, in accordance with ADB‘s Safeguard
Policy Statement 2009.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The project is set within a number of key government policy documents. The

National Long-Term Development Plan 2005-2025 and the related National
Medium-Term Development Plan 2015-2019 give prominence to: agriculture-sector
development, in particular ensuring food security, self-sufficiency and food
sovereignty through increased domestic production capacity; and the improved
provision of food which is sufficient in quantity and diversity, and which meets the
requirements of food safety, quality and nutrient content at an affordable price. The
project will support implementation of the participating ministries’ strategic plans
and priorities.

38. The project will complement and provide a robust framework for government
expenditure plans: MoPWH will invest almost US$25 billion over the period
2015-2019, including more than US$5 billion for irrigation rehabilitation works. MoA
has allocated US$219 million in 2015 through UPSUS for nationwide investments in
priority areas (i.e. agricultural infrastructure, seed, fertilizer, agricultural machinery
and extension services). Overall investments of almost US$15 billion are foreseen
for 2015-2019, including more than US$3 billion for improvements in agricultural
irrigation infrastructure and almost US$3 billion for improvements in productivity
and production. Both investments are for rice and food crops and are intended to
contribute to achieving food self-sufficiency by 2017. Thus the project enables more
effective and more efficient coordination of public investment in irrigated
agriculture.

Innovations and scaling upC.
39. The project adopts an innovation and scaling-up agenda responding to the

Government’s expectation that externally financed projects offer innovative
solutions that can be scaled up and that they assist learning through
implementation experience and the development of new policies, institutional
arrangements and programmes at the national level. The project will: (i) facilitate



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

10

piloting of innovations through subprojects, as well as at the overall project
management level; (ii) conduct evaluations or studies to review experiences gained
with the innovations promoted; (iii) analyse evidence, discuss findings with
stakeholders and synthesize conclusions; and (iv) support the scaling up of
successful approaches, methods and technologies – both within the project and
beyond it, through public policies, institutions and practices.

Policy engagementD.
40. In response to the Government’s request for strengthened policy-level support for

irrigated agriculture, the project will focus on strengthening the capacity of
government institutions and staff at national, provincial and district levels to
conduct consultative policy dialogue and design and to implement evidence-based
policies, regulations and strategies for participatory irrigation management and
irrigated smallholder agriculture. It will strengthen the local-level policy and
regulatory framework for supporting smallholder irrigated agriculture, building on
the participatory irrigation principles of the Government and ensuring that these
are operationalized. It will also strengthen the capacity of those institutions
responsible for coordinating irrigation development and delivering services, and will
build farmers’ understanding of their rights and responsibilities under national/local
policies. Moreover, the project will support the establishment and initial operation
of irrigation knowledge and training centres at the provincial level and will establish
a KMC within BAPPENAS to coordinate support for irrigated agriculture, promote
policy dialogue among domestic stakeholders and strengthen national and local
policy processes.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Indonesia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included as
appendix I.

42. The Republic of Indonesia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Indonesia in an amount equivalent to ninety-three million one
hundred and fifty thousand euros (EUR 93,150,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Indonesia in an amount equivalent to one million four hundred and ten
thousand euros (EUR 1,410,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic for the Northern Smallholder
Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural
Financial Services Programme


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization
Project: Rural Financial Services Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Lao People's Democratic Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total programme cost: US$19.7 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 7.3 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of three fourths of
one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Bilateral development partner(s) to be identified

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$2.9 million

Bilateral development partner(s) US$1.9 million

Terms of cofinancing: ADB: 1 per cent interest charge for grace period and
thereafter 1.5 per cent

Bilateral development partner(s): Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$4.34 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

1

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services Programme, as contained in
paragraph 40.

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the past decade, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has experienced rapid

economic growth and poverty reduction. Although the national poverty rate declined
steadily by 40 per cent over the last 15 years, 26 per cent of the population still lives
below the poverty line. Poverty is predominantly rural, with high concentrations in
remote and mountainous areas adjacent to the north-eastern and eastern borders
with Viet Nam.

2. Agriculture and natural resources accounted for 24.8 per cent of gross domestic
product (GDP) and over 70 per cent of employment in 2014. More than 80 per cent
of the population depends on agriculture for their livelihood, while more than
50 per cent of households are subsistence farmers with annual incomes below
US$300. While GDP grew at 7.6 per cent in 2013, the agricultural sector grew by
just 2.7 per cent due to low productivity and inadequate links to opportunities arising
from rapid growth elsewhere in the economy. The livestock subsector is an
important source of income and store of wealth for rural smallholders, with
89 per cent of smallholders owning one or more types of livestock – buffaloes,
cattle, pigs, goats, poultry or other small livestock.

3. The expanding demand for livestock products in the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and neighbouring countries is generating new income opportunities for
households in rural areas. The capacity of rural households to benefit from such
demand, however, remains limited. The productivity of traditional livestock
production systems is low and livestock is still primarily kept as a means of storing
wealth. There is a need to improve production methods to reduce costs and improve
off-take if rural livestock production systems are to provide expanded and
sustainable sources of income for smallholders.

4. The Government’s overarching long-term development goal is to graduate from the
status of least-developed country by 2020. The National Socio-Economic
Development Plan (NSEDP) and the National Growth and Poverty Eradication
Strategy are the main policy documents outlining the country’s strategy to eradicate
poverty. Poverty reduction efforts are focused on the 72 poorest districts, which will
benefit from community-driven access-oriented rural development. Ten of the 12
districts selected to benefit under the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project (NSLCP) are high-priority poor districts. IFAD supports the
Government in implementing its eighth NSEDP and, under the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2011-2016, pursued the objectives of promoting
economic growth, sustainable livelihoods and food and nutrition security of poor
rural people.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

2

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The demand for meat in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is forecast to increase
significantly over the next decade, as is demand for exports to neighbouring China
and Viet Nam. The Government has set the target of increasing livestock production
from the current 210,000 tons per year to 365,000 tons per year by 2020. The
information available suggests current exports meet less than 10 per cent of
potential demand, while domestic demand is rising at 4.5 per cent per year.

6. Against this backdrop, the Government requested IFAD and the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) to finance a programme supporting the commercialization of livestock
smallholders through the lateral scaling up of the recently completed Northern
Region Sustainable Livelihoods through Livestock Development Project (LDP),
cofinanced by ADB, IFAD and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
from June 2007 to March 2014. LDP reached approximately 13,000 smallholders
with the potential advantages of more intensive, commercially oriented livestock
practices. Overall, the LDP initiated a long-term process of modernizing and
commercializing smallholder livestock production. Given the respective organizations’
comparative advantages, IFAD will support improving smallholder livelihoods
through access to rural financial services and strengthened farmers’ groups, while
ADB will invest in critical infrastructure and technical support. The ADB investment
became operational in the first quarter of 2015.

7. The Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural Financial
Services Programme (NSLCP-RFSP) supports the Government’s policy of expanding
domestic livestock production through improved productivity and value addition,
including through sanitary measures, to enable commercial smallholder farmers to
compete more effectively in regional markets and in import substitution.
Furthermore, the rural financial services component of LDP showed a high unmet
demand for rural financial services in the programme districts. Microfinance
institutions (MFIs) registered with the Bank of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(BoL) are expanding in the country, both lending to agriculture and providing
financial management and brokerage services to the rapidly expanding
savings-financed village funds (VFs). Private banks, however, are not yet significant
agriculture-sector financiers. In this environment, the NSLCP-RFSP will adopt a
two-pronged approach: to deliver NSLCP livestock credit at market terms on the
short term; and, on the longer term, to develop a strategy to: (i) build VFs into
sustainable financial institutions able to meet local immediate-term needs for rural
financial service; and (ii) improve the incentive structure for private banks and MFIs
to provide medium-to-long term agricultural rural financial services.

8. The financing for NSLCP-RFSP is in line with the COSOP 2011–2016, which
comprises three strategic objectives: (i) community-based access to and
management of land and natural resources; (ii) access to advisory services and
inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated farming systems; and (iii) access to
markets.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area. Programme implementation will focus on approximately 200

villages located in 12 districts in the northern Houapanh, Luang Namtha, Luang
Prabang and Xiengkhouang provinces, where poverty rates range from 28 per cent
to 43 per cent, with rural areas worst off. In each district, priority animal types will
be selected for support with due attention to potential production capacity for
support of market-oriented livestock value chains.

10. Target group. In each district, the programme will work with rural
livestock-farming households that are members of smallholder livestock production



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

3

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and marketing groups (SLPMGs) to be formed under the programme. The
programme aims to work with a total of 300 SLPMGs in the 12 districts, extending
livestock-production and -marketing support to approximately 5,400 households and
their 32,000 members. Related community-based livestock infrastructure
investments will target an estimated additional 10,000 livestock-owning households
in the programme area. Access to rural financial services through village-based
saving and credit schemes will benefit approximately 20,000 households, including
non-livestock farming households. The programme will tailor its overall technical and
rural financial service support to ensure the inclusion of marginalized and poor
villagers in the programme activities through VFs.

11. The NSLCP will strengthen support for women and ethnic groups through intensive
training programmes. In collaboration with Lao Women’s Union (LWU), the
programme will promote gender equality and women’s participation in
village-development planning, SLPMGs and market-linkage programmes, assisting
women to gain equal access to agricultural support and investment opportunities.
Women’s empowerment and gender mainstreaming will be implemented and
monitored through a gender action plan. Farmer-to-farmer extension programmes to
improve livestock husbandry will specifically target ethnic groups.

B. Programme development objective
12. The goal of the NSLCP-RFSP is to establish a sustainable and scalable rural financial

and technical services model that supports the reduction of rural poverty and
increased livestock productivity. The development objective is to increase livestock
production through expanded financial and technical services.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Within the larger framework of the NSLCP, the IFAD-supported part of the

programme will have two main components:

14. Component 1. Increased productivity of smallholder livestock producers.
This component comprises two subcomponents:

(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups. The
programme will work with 300 existing livestock production groups formed
under LDP that have made good progress along the commercialization
trajectory, to further build their capacities and expand their membership base
to form SLPMGs. SLPMGs will progress beyond the basic production
improvements achieved under LDP to: (i) access input supplies and services
needed for commercial production; (ii) produce higher-quality livestock for
sale at provincial markets; and (iii) market as a producer group. The provision
of services and technical assistance will assist SLPMGs in building their
capacities in livestock production and farm financial management so as to
profitably boost livestock production and income. Working with the Lao
Farmers’ Network, the programme will promote farmer-to-farmer extension.
The programme will identify lead farmers at the village cluster level for further
training in animal husbandry, who will subsequently mentor livestock
production programmes through interested SLPMGs.

(ii) Technology development. Under this subcomponent, four primary activities
will be implemented:

(a) Livestock market studies will evaluate livestock marketing in target
provinces and assess opportunities at the national level for value chain
development and livestock product export.

(b) Forage production will develop selected leguminous forages as profitable
farmer-produced seed crops for free distribution in small amounts to
new households, while also promoting the purchase and distribution of



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

4

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

grass splits to support the vegetative development of productive forage
grasses.

(c) As animal husbandry skills improve, various combinations of technical
and financial services will enable interested SLPMG members to become
livestock-breeding households and procure improved sires to sell
breeding services to villagers.

(d) Land use planning and allocation activities will enable villages to prepare
or update their land management plans to designate resources such as
water sources and suitable land for communal livestock production,
including planting forage and animal housing; where land use titles have
not yet been allocated, the programme will support participatory and
systematic individual and community land use titling.

15. Component 2. Sustainable and scalable rural finance services. This
component comprises three subcomponents to articulate a sequential three-pronged
approach to develop rural financial services.

(i) Financial services to NSLCP beneficiaries. The programme will provide
additional financing to former LDP village livelihood funds for one round of
lending to SLPMG members for viable livestock investments through
amortized loans at market rates. This project-driven credit scheme will be
phased out midterm and replaced by a longer-term sustainable financial
services system established under the programme (see points (ii) and (iii)
below). To support livestock credit delivery, technical assistance will be
provided to establish new guidelines for credit schemes and to empower
district LWUs to responsibly manage livestock development credit to SLPMG
members.

(ii) Networked village funds. The programme, in partnership with the BoL and
a bilateral development partner, will support the development of at least 200
community-based, savings-driven VFs. Such BoL-based schemes have
functioned successfully for more than five years in other provinces. The
programme will develop a systematic approach to expanding and
strengthening VFs, based on the establishment of VF-owned, second-tier
support organizations – Network Support Organizations (NSOs) – at the
provincial level. NSOs operate as management agents for their member VFs,
who also own the NSOs.

(iii) National agriculture-refinancing facility. At the request of the
Government, the programme will provide medium-term assistance to
establish a national agriculture refinancing facility (NARF), to be located within
the BoL. The NARF will receive funding from existing grants held by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) as well as from the programme,
which it will apply to refinance a portion of the lending made by commercial
banks and MFIs to targeted agricultural sectors, in line with the national
agriculture development strategy, at rates that would significantly increase
margins for lending institutions. The NARF will thereby provide a powerful
incentive for the expansion of financial services in rural areas. Reflows from
the one-off project credit operations (described under (i) above) will be
channelled into the NARF. In the medium term, the NARF will also capitalize
NSOs (described under (ii)) once they reach a certain level of maturity.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. Programme implementation will span five years and support the Government’s policy

of expanding domestic livestock through improved productivity and value addition.
The approach also supports the Government’s sam sang (decentralization) policy,



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

5

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

whereby the province serves as the strategic unit, the district as the planning and
budgetary unit, and the village as the implementing unit. The programme
exemplifies such an approach through bottom-up planning, support to farmer-led
technical service delivery, the establishment of private and communal land use
rights, and the catalysis of private investments in rural and agricultural sectors. The
management structure will build on lessons learned through previous IFAD projects
in the country and the region, avoid parallel management systems and implement
transparent mechanisms for financial management and fund transfers.

B. Organizational framework
17. MAF, through its Department of Livestock and Fisheries, will be the lead agency with

overall responsibility for programme implementation, which it will delegate to district
administrations and to the National Programme Management Office (NPMO), based
in Vientiane. The heads of the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office and the
District Agriculture and Forestry Office will serve as programme focal points at the
provincial and district levels, respectively. The National Project Steering Committee
(NPSC), chaired by the MAF Vice-Minister, will be responsible for the overall direction
of the programme. It will provide guidance and oversight to participating provinces
and districts. The NPSC will include representatives of MAF, the Ministry of Finance,
the Ministry of Planning and Investment, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry
and the four provincial Governors/Vice-Governors. Provincial Project Steering
Committees, headed by provincial governors, will be responsible for their respective
annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) and the financial and physical progress of
the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The AWPB will be the key management
tool for planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. The
programme will follow a participatory planning approach in the target areas. The
monitoring and evaluation system will: (i) guide implementation through the
assessment and analysis of outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’
nutrition and livelihoods; and (ii) provide the Government information to measure
programme contributions to the implementation of MAF national strategies, and data
and analysis for evidence-based policymaking. A management information system
will be established to monitor operational and financial progress alike. Furthermore,
special studies will be undertaken at midterm and upon programme completion to
evaluate: (i) improvements in production and productivity; (ii) the use and benefits
of VFs and NSOs; and (iii) the implementation methodology/approaches adopted by
the programme. Other studies will be undertaken as deemed necessary by the
NPMO.

19. Learning and knowledge management. The programme’s knowledge
management and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share
knowledge; support the dissemination of innovations; and identify issues for
advocacy with policymakers, the broader donor community and other relevant
stakeholders. The programme’s learning systems will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote agricultural and financial services initiatives; and (ii) various
formats for the dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. As custodian of the funds in the programme account, the

NPMO will be responsible for programme financial management. The NPMO will also
be accountable to the Government and to IFAD for the proper use of funds in line
with applicable legal agreements and with contractual arrangements with service
providers. It will provide detailed financial statements of programme operations,
resources and expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

6

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the
programme rated the fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close
supervision, support and oversight from IFAD through: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the development of a financial manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iii) biannual supervision and
implementation support missions; and (iv) a control framework integrating periodic
internal audits and independent external audits.

21. Flow of funds. The Government will open a designated account, denominated in
United States dollars, in the BoL to receive and hold the proceeds of the IFAD loan.
The NPMO will open and maintain an operational programme account, denominated
in Laotian kip, which will be funded and replenished as necessary from the
designated account upon NPMO request and in accordance with expenditures
incurred under approved AWPBs. The Ministry of Finance will ensure the timely
transfer of funds required by the NPMO. The NPMO will ensure the compliance of
replenishment requests from implementing agencies and that timely withdrawal
applications are submitted to IFAD with appropriate supporting documentation.

22. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed by
IFAD will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD’s Project Procurement
Guidelines. National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be
applied to the extent that they are consistent with those Guidelines.

23. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems will be established
at the NPMO level. An external audit will be carried out in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits.
Independent external auditors will be appointed on a timely basis. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months
following the close of each fiscal year.

24. Governance. The NPMO will prepare a programme framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement is carried out, whether by the districts or by the NPMO, in accordance
with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the publication of all
procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business partnership details
in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices; (ii) the participation of
end-user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt communication with
bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of conduct to be signed by
all staff involved in programme implementation.

E. Supervision
25. IFAD and ADB will jointly supervise the programme. Annual supervision missions will

be organized jointly with the Government and include the main implementing
agencies and stakeholders. Implementation support missions will be dispatched on
the basis of specific needs from the Hanoi subregional office. Supervision and
implementation support missions will jointly assess achievements and lessons,
review innovations and advise on corrective actions as required. A midterm review
will be organized by the Government and IFAD after 30 months, in mid-2019, in
close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, including the cofinanciers.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total cost of the IFAD-supported part of NSLCP-RFSP is estimated at

US$19.7 million, including contingencies, as indicated in table 1. The NSLCP-RFSP is
part of the larger IFAD-ADB financed NSLCP, which has a total value of
US$38.3 million, including US$21 million of ADB financing.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

7

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Programme financing
27. The IFAD-supported part of the NSLCP will be financed by a highly concessional loan

in the amount of US$10.0 million (50.9 per cent), while ADB will provide
US$2.9 million (14.7 per cent) and the bilateral development partner
US$1.85 million (9.4 per cent). The LDP carry-over in terms of reflows from rural
finance schemes is expected to provide US$2.4 million (12.2 per cent), while the
Government will directly contribute an estimated US$1.91 million (9.7 per cent) and
beneficiaries US$0.6 million (3.1 per cent). While the LDP carry-over is, in principle,
part of the government contribution, this amount is shown separately in table 1 and
table 2 for the convenience of monitoring.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. It is estimated that the programme will benefit a minimum of 200 villages,

comprising 20,000 poor smallholder households, through access to livestock
production technology, support for livestock management infrastructure and
improved rural financial services. The direct beneficiaries include households
receiving programme-managed SLPMG livestock credit; borrowers from
NARF-refinanced NSOs/VFs investing in agricultural production; and households and
small agribusinesses borrowing from approved MFIs and commercial banks
refinanced through the NARF. In programme districts, villages and households not
directly targeted by the NSLCP-RFSP will benefit indirectly through the improved
capacities, services, systems and technologies adopted in their communities,
kum bans (village clusters) and districts.



/R
ev.1

8

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount %t Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Smallholder Livestock producers adopt productive technology 1 787 30.8 2 796 48.2 600 10.3 619 10.7 5 803
(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups 897 22.9 2 400 61.2 600 15.3 22 0.6 3 919
(ii) Technology development 890 47.3 396 21.0 597 31.7 1 883

2. Farmers access sustainable and scalable rural financial
services 7 756 58.6 1 850 14.0 2 400 18.1 1 238 9.3 13 244
(i). Financial services to SLPMG 3 154 56.6 2 400 43.0 23 0.4 5 577
(ii) Networked village funds in NSLCP districts 3 265 62.1 1 850 35.2 145 2.8 5 260
(ii) Agriculture refinancing facility 1 337 55.5 1070 44.5 2 407

3. Effective project management 456 89.2 55 10.8 512
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Vehicles 32 100 32
B. Credit 3 750 52.4 2 400 33.6 1 000 14.0 7 150
1. Agriculture refinancing facility 1 000 50.0 1 000 50.0 2 000
2. NSLCP financial services 2 750 53.4 2 400 46.6 5 150

C. Operating costs 395 97.7 9 2.3 404
D. Training 1 081 100 1 081
E. Good, Services and Inputs 2 111 63.0 396 11.8 845 25.2 3 352
F. Consultancies 1 679 46.9 1 850 51.7 47 1.3 3 576
G. Equipment and Materials 561 98.0 12 2.0 573
H. Grants and subsidies 343 10.3 2 400 71.8 600 17.9 3 343
I. Salaries 49 100 49
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.2

0
/R

ev.1



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

9

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

29. The overall economic internal rate of return is 11.9 per cent, against a social
discount rate in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic currently estimated at 6 per
cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.16 indicates a return of approximately US$2.16 for
every dollar invested. The sensitivity analysis indicates the internal rate of return to
be robust.

D. Sustainability
30. The NSLCP-RFSP design approach placed central importance on sustainability. In

terms of rural financial services, the programme-implemented livestock credit
scheme will be phased out and reflows channelled into the NARF. In addition, a
significant number or rural finance operations are expected to be conducted through
the strengthened VFs, which, due to their operational mode, tend to reach full
sustainability at very low operational volumes. If successfully implemented under the
NSLCP-RFSP, it will be possible to expand and scale up the VF-support approach,
based on the services of the NSOs, in other parts of the country. As for the NARF,
the refinancing activities would be conducted only with banks and registered MFIs
that have passed due diligence tests and reached full institutional sustainability. The
programme also places emphasis on activities related to land use allocation and
titling, which are imperative for ensuring the sustainability of any investments in
technology and knowledge transfer, and their adoption by livestock farmers. Finally,
the programme will promote the capacity-building of public institutions from the
district to the national levels. Such investments in public capacity will enable the
establishment of a sustainable technical advisory services system.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risks identified relate to institutional issues, including: (i) a lack of

technical coordination at the grassroots level; (ii) ineffective inter-institutional
cooperation and dialogue and consequent delays in disbursement for field
implementation; and (iii) a lack of interest in rural expansion among formal banks
and registered MFIs. To mitigate these risks, the programme will: (i) develop a
thorough coordination mechanism in the implementation guidelines; (ii) ensure the
involvement of affected kum bans and farmers’ groups at all steps in the
preparation, implementation and supervision of programme activities; and (iii) raise
awareness regarding value chain financing possibilities.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The programme design is guided by IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the

COSOP 2011-2016 for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The programme
complies with IFAD’s policies and strategies on gender equality and women’s
empowerment, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
access to land and security of land tenure, and knowledge management. While the
programme’s design and implementation activities may have some environmental
and social impacts on human populations or environmentally significant areas, these
will be small in scale, dispersed, largely site-specific and reversible. In terms of
environmental impact, the programme is classified as Category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. The Programme is consistent with the Government’s development objectives, which

promote the expansion of market-oriented agricultural production. The programme
objectives are consistent with IFAD’s COSOP, with their focus on agriculture and
pro-poor trade, sustainable growth through private sector development, regional
integration and transforming agriculture from subsistence farming into a diversified
commercialized sector.

34. The programme will complement other IFAD, ADB and bilateral initiatives to improve
food security and income in the Greater Mekong subregion, including: (i) the



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

10

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project; (ii) the Microfinance in
Rural Areas – Access to Finance Programme; (iii) the Land Management and
Decentralized Planning Project; (iv) the planned New Zealand Aid
Programme-financed Lao People’s Democratic Republic Beef Industry and
Veterinary Training Project; and (v) the Core Agricultural Support Project Phase II
(for food safety, linkages to cross-border value chains and livestock management).

C. Innovations and scaling up
35. The establishment of an innovative rural financial services model, at the explicit

request of the Government, is at the core of programme design. The most significant
innovation is the expansion of VFs and NSOs. Establishing new VFs and improving
the functioning of existing community-based operators are important steps forward
for financial inclusion and the provision of financial services in rural areas. The
proposed VF- and NSO-based approach provides an opportunity to test options for
further developing such community-based approaches and to link them more closely
to formal financial sector operations. The programme will support the Government in
developing innovative methods to promote rural and agricultural finance throughout
the country.

D. Policy engagement
36. The Programme will contribute to the analysis of policy issues related to

implementation experiences, in particular in rural finance. It will also foster
stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. In addition, the
Programme is expected to provide evidence-based inputs to policy discussions on
issues such as the regulatory framework of the livestock subsector, and land use
planning. The Programme will use platforms such as the Agricultural and Rural
Development Sector Working Group to identify policy gaps and raise policy issues
related to implementation experiences.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A financing agreement between Lao People’s Democratic Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

38. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in in the amount of seven million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 7,300,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$10.0 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the
Union of Myanmar for the Eastern States
Agribusiness Project

Eastern States Agribusiness Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation

Total project cost: US$65.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 20 million (equivalent to approximately US$27.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 1.1 million (equivalent to approximately US$1.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent (0.75 per
cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM)1

Amount of cofinancing: US$29.2 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of borrower: US$4.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.0 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 Subject to successful negotiations between the Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and KEXIM.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

1

11

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendations for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Eastern States
Agribusiness Project, as contained in paragraph 57.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the Union of
Myanmar for the Eastern States Agribusiness Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Emerging from 50 years of isolation, Myanmar has embarked on a comprehensive

path of political and economic reforms. These aim to introduce elements of popular
representation into the political sphere, foster economic growth and inclusive social
development, improve the business environment, attract foreign investment and
reduce poverty.

2. Myanmar is the largest country in South-East Asia, with rich endowments of land
and water, and favourable conditions for agriculture. Its population was estimated
at 51.5 million in 2014, with an annual growth rate of 1 per cent. Some 67 per cent
of the population is rural. Myanmar is ethnically diverse, with eight major ethnic
groups and 135 subgroups.

3. Despite being rich in resources, Myanmar is one of the poorest nations in South-
East Asia. An estimated one third of the population lived below the poverty line in
2005, decreasing to one fourth in 2010. The 2014 Human Development Report
ranked the country 150th among 186 nations rated, with a human development
index of 0.524. In 2013, Myanmar's GDP amounted to US$53 billion, with an annual
growth rate of 6.8 per cent.

4. The agriculture sector constitutes the core of the economy, representing 38 per
cent of GDP and employing about 70 per cent of the working population. There is a
strong association between agriculture and poverty in Myanmar, and there is
significantly greater poverty in rural areas. The incidence of poverty is also greater
among diverse ethnic groups compared with the majority ethnic population.

5. While, in aggregate terms, Myanmar produces a surplus of food, many rural areas
suffer from chronic food insecurity. Disparities exist among and within states and
within communities, where household food insecurity and poverty are closely
linked. Rural poverty is largely a function of lack of resource endowments. Poor
rural people typically consist of landless people and small and marginal farmers,
usually owning less than an acre to up to five acres of land. They lack access to
adequate and nutritious food, as well as to essential non-food items. Many of the
poorest live in isolated hill tracts of ethnic states in the eastern regions. These
states were previously affected by decades of civil conflict that left them isolated
and without development investment.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. As requested by the Government, the 2013-2015 PBAS allocation for Myanmar is
being applied to two loan-financed projects to develop scalable models in diverse
agroecological zones. The first, Fostering Agricultural Revitalization in Myanmar,
focuses on creating a sustainable agricultural development model for the central
dry zone. The second, the Eastern States Agribusiness Project (ESAP), focuses on



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

2

22

creating a smallholder agriculture and community agroforestry model for the
upland/highland zone, with potential for scaling up across the eastern states.

7. The project's rational is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and the
Government's policies to reduce economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with the National Comprehensive Development Plan, the Framework for
Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural Development
Action Plan. Specifically, the rationale has four dimensions: (i) to create a model at
the state level for post-conflict economic reintegration that lays the foundation for
sustained peace; (ii) to create a model for environmentally sustainable agricultural
modernization in degraded areas; (iii) to forge pathways for supporting poor
communities in the transition from subsistence to commercial agriculture; and
(iv) to better link Myanmar's eastern states with regional markets and technology
flows.

8. The project is consistent with the 2014-2018 country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) for Myanmar, which aims to contribute to reducing rural
poverty, specifically of smallholders, landless people, and ethnic and other
marginalized groups. The COSOP defines three strategic objectives for IFAD’s
engagement: (i) empower rural women and men to access agricultural resources,
technologies, services and markets; (ii) create business and employment
opportunities for rural women and men; and (iii) promote the social and economic
empowerment of marginalized groups, particularly ethnic groups. The project
addresses all three strategic objectives.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
9. The project will be implemented in selected areas of Kayin and Shan (South) States

in the eastern part of Myanmar. These two states were affected by decades of civil
conflict and insecurity, which adversely affected their socio-economic development.
With recent peace-building efforts, the two states have been selected for
agribusiness development due to their good security, relatively stable political
context and economic potential.

10. In Kayin State, the project encompasses 12 irrigation schemes covering three
townships (Hpa-an, Hlain Bwe, Kaukarate) and the forest communities of
Thandaunggyi township in the northern mountains, for an aggregate area of some
108,000 acres. In Shan State, the project covers the Ho-Pong irrigation scheme
and its upland watershed areas (Ho-pong, Taunggyi, Siseine townships) as well as
the Hekke irrigation scheme (Taunggyi, Kyauk Talon Gyi townships), for an
aggregate area of about 79,000 acres.

11. The target group consists of poor rural women and men in the project areas.
Specifically, it covers: (i) farmers in irrigated lowlands with marginal, small and
medium-sized landholdings ranging from less than an acre to up to 10 acres each;
(ii) farmers in the rainfed uplands with marginal, small and medium landholdings
ranging from less than an acre to up to 10 acres each; (iii) agroforestry households
in mountainous areas of northern Kayin; and (iv) landless households, which will
have access to job opportunities as agricultural labourers or as workers in
agribusiness. The project will ensure that employment opportunities facilitate the
economic reintegration of returning migrants, ex-combatants and displaced people.

12. An inclusive targeting approach will be applied that encompasses geographical, self-
and direct targeting, and social and gender inclusion. The project is expected to
benefit 62,400 households or 315,000 rural men and women.

B. Project development objective
13. The project will develop an inclusive, sustainable and scalable model for smallholder

agriculture and community agroforestry in the eastern states of Kayin and Shan



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

3

33

(South). It will promote commercialized smallholder agriculture linked to
agribusiness, improve living standards in forest communities, and reverse
environmental degradation in sloping areas. It will generate substantial benefits for
households belonging to the Karen, Shan, Paoh, Intha and Mon ethnic groups.

14. The project’s goal is to improve the economic status of poor rural women and men
in selected areas of Kayin and Shan States. Its objective is to increase the incomes
of smallholder and agroforestry households in these areas in an environmentally
sustainable manner.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project has two components. Component 1. Strategic investments. This

component will finance strategic investments in land development and community
agroforestry (approximately US$42.6 million, 65 per cent of total project costs).

16. Subcomponent 1.1: Land development. The project will contribute to the
expansion of irrigated areas served by primary and secondary canals, with
complementary investments in land development identified through a participatory
process. The objectives are to improve drainage networks, irrigation water delivery
and field access, and to create opportunities for crop diversification in response to
market signals. A participatory land-use planning approach will be applied, and
free, prior and informed consent will be introduced. Farmer empowerment and
participatory water management will be strengthened in all irrigation works.

17. Subcomponent 1.2: Community agroforestry. Project investment in
agroforestry will improve living conditions, generate economic benefits for forest
and upland villages and reduce encroachment on primary forest. The introduction of
sloping agricultural land technology (SALT) will protect ecosystems, increase soil
water infiltration and reduce soil erosion. In particular, SALT will generate
substantial positive environmental impact by reducing sedimentation in Inle Lake
and the Ho-Pong valley drainage system. Upland and agroforestry activities will be
defined and implemented on the basis of a participatory and culturally sensitive
approach.

18. Component 2. Enabling investments. This component will improve target group
access to knowledge, technology and services, and will maximize the benefits
generated from strategic investments (approximately US$15.7 million, 24 per cent
of total project costs).

19. Subcomponent 2.1: Knowledge and technology. The project will improve
farmer access to the technologies, inputs and services required to improve the
productivity of staple, fodder and high-value crops. It will promote a pluralistic
participatory extension platform in support of smallholder households. A network of
knowledge centres (KCs) will be established to broker service delivery to farm and
forest households through linkages with public institutions and the private sector.
These centres will operate on the basis of: a decentralized and bottom-up
approach; pluralism of actors in service delivery; promotion of public/private
partnerships (PPPs); and a clear market orientation comprising cost recovery and
sustainability.

20. Subcomponent 2.2: Services. Smallholders and entrepreneurs will be provided
access to markets and to adapted and affordable financial products. Contractual
arrangements among farmers and agribusinesses, such as contract farming or
outgrower schemes, will be promoted for commodities with a comparative
advantage, market demand and growth potential. A competitive grant scheme will
attract processors to the project area, and a credit guarantee mechanism will
improve smallholder access to bank financing. Financial inclusion will be promoted
by fostering savings and credit groups and providing financial literacy training.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

4

44

21. The remaining project financing (US$6.9 million, 11 per cent of total project costs)
is allocated to central project coordination and decentralized project management,
described below.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

22. Based on institutional assessment at the state level, experience in similar contexts
and the country strategy, the ESAP implementation approach is to: (i) strengthen
state-level Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MOAI) departments and other
agencies involved in agricultural and rural development; (ii) increase the
responsibility of state-level MOAI departments in phased implementation of
activities; (iii) establish a small, state-level project implementation office (PIO) in
each state to manage activities; (iv) organize implementation through contracts
with public and private service providers; and (v) implement project activities in
phases.

23. Project activities will be implemented through contracts with service providers such
as ministries/departments, NGOs and the private sector. Service providers will
enter into performance-based contracts, and their performance will be assessed by
project management and by community representatives where applicable.

B. Organizational framework
24. The project's governance framework will consist of: (i) a national project steering

committee composed of representatives of relevant central-level ministries, to
provide policy and strategic guidance; (ii) state project coordination committees
composed of directors of relevant state-level departments and representatives of
community organizations, to oversee project coordination at the state level; and
(iii) village groups, composed of representatives of community organizations,
partner NGOs and service providers, to monitor and ensure effective participation,
poverty targeting and gender mainstreaming.

25. In alignment with the Government's decentralization policy, project management
and implementation are decentralized to the state level. A PIO will be established in
each state – responsible and accountable for state-level management of the project
and achievement of its results. PIOs will be structured around project components
and investments, and will have a certain level of financial autonomy. Their staff will
be recruited on a competitive basis in compliance with IFAD guidelines. PIOs will be
supported by a central project coordination unit (PCU), established in Nay Pyi Taw
for all IFAD-financed projects. The PCU will support PIOs in planning, financial
management, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
26. The state-level annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs), supplemented by activity

calendars, will be the key planning instruments for the project. They will identify
annual targets and activities, set implementation priorities, forecast procurement
requirements and facilitate the mobilization of staff and financial resources. These
AWP/Bs will be prepared through a consultative approach involving community
organizations, KCs and stakeholders. The planning process will be coordinated with
national planning procedures, as the project budget is being incorporated into the
national budget.

27. The M&E system is designed to offer comprehensive and reliable information for
results-based management. The system will be participatory and decentralized, and
compliant with the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) framework. It
will have a three-tier structure: (i) output monitoring – focusing on physical and
financial inputs, activities and outputs; (ii) outcome monitoring of the use of
outputs and measurement of benefits at household and community levels; and
(iii) impact assessment – evaluating project impact on target groups. All M&E data,



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

5

55

analysis, and reporting will be disaggregated by gender and ethnic group.
Considering the well-known problems with data availability and quality in Myanmar,
a data acquisition plan for the project area will be developed at the outset of
implementation.

28. The project will use locally adapted RIMS surveys as the main quantitative survey
tools at baseline, midterm and completion. Ad hoc surveys, qualitative case studies
and thematic reviews will be outsourced to independent institutions to verify results
and draw lessons on themes such as: food security, cropping patterns, climate
resilience; small and micro-business sustainability; participatory water
management; and impact on incomes. An external independent third party (such as
a national university or NGO) will be engaged to assess project impact periodically.

29. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s operational experiences
will create valuable knowledge, which will be captured by the PIO and PCU and
used to generate lessons and best practices. Once documented, the project’s model
of upland/highland agricultural development may be scaled up across the eastern
states. The project will share knowledge and experiences with the wider community
of development practitioners across Asia through the IFADAsia knowledge
management portal.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
30. Project financial management arrangements will ensure that: (i) funds are used for

intended purposes efficiently and cost-effectively; (ii) disbursement of funds
facilitates rapid implementation of activities; (iii) funds are well managed and flow
smoothly; (iv) financial statements are prepared in conformity with internationally
recognized accounting standards; (v) a robust flow of reliable information on
project activities facilitates accountability, transparency and disclosure; and
(vi) project resources and assets are safeguarded.

31. As fiduciary risks are high in Myanmar, the project will apply a number of mitigating
measures: (i) installation of professional accounting software; (ii) competitive
recruitment of qualified staff; (iii) preparation of a financial management manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iv) state-level PIOs with delegated
authority to manage and disburse project resources, and confirmation of PCU
delegated authority; (v) technical assistance and external oversight; (vi) a control
framework integrating periodic internal audits, independent external audits and
social elements; and (vii) a good governance framework to ensure accountability
and transparency.

32. Retroactive financing. As an exception to section 4.08 of the General Conditions
for Agricultural Development Financing, a maximum amount of SDR 100,000 for
otherwise eligible project expenditures incurred after the date of project approval
by the Executive Board and before the entry into force of the financing agreement
will be financed. Such financing will be mainly for the implementation of start-up
activities in respect of expenditures for: (i) capacity-building for PCU/PIO staff and
target groups; (ii) consulting services for studies and field surveys; and (iii) other
consultancy services. Such expenditures are pre-financed by the Government, and
will be reimbursed by IFAD only after the financing agreement has entered into
force and conditions precedent to disbursement have been met.

33. The project will use the imprest fund method in operating the two designated
accounts (for the loan and grant respectively). The Government will ensure that
counterpart funds are contained in the national allocations for MOAI at central and
state levels and that they are released to the project promptly.

34. Flow of funds to the two states will be decentralized. This will strengthen
governance structures while maintaining transparency of activities and central
controls. The bank account signatory powers for state-level expenditures will be set
at a sufficiently senior level. Control of expenditures at the state level will be



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

6

66

maintained by retaining centralization of withdrawal application preparation and
approval, access to state-level accounting data, and consolidation of AWP/Bs and
reporting.

35. External audit will be carried out in compliance with International Standards on
Auditing and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits, and independent external auditors
will be appointed on a timely basis. Audit reports will be furnished to IFAD within
six months of the end of the relevant fiscal year.

36. The PCU will oversee project procurement at central and state levels. The
procurement of goods, works and services will be handled by the state-level PIOs,
with support from the PCU for consolidated or international purchases. Procurement
will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD procurement guidelines and
handbook. Procurement methods, prior review arrangements, cost and time
estimates, and risk mitigation measures will be defined in the letter to the borrower
and reflected in the procurement plan. The project implementation manual will
detail procurement procedures, processes and management arrangements.

E. Supervision
37. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. A supervision and implementation

support mission will be undertaken annually. MOAI departments at central and
state levels will support and participate in these missions.

38. Supervision will be applied as a continuous process requiring ongoing
communication and engagement with the central Government, state governments,
the PCU and PIOs. It will encompass three functions: (i) fiduciary compliance –
covering legal conditions, financial management, procurement and contracting;
(ii) supervision – focusing on performance, progress towards objectives, activities
and outputs, planning and budgeting, monitoring and reporting, governance and
management, targeting and gender equality; and (iii) implementation support.
Implementation support will incorporate a country programme perspective by:
introducing a broad view of development investments; influencing policy based on
operational experiences; developing systems and institutions for poverty reduction;
facilitating financial and knowledge partnerships; and generating lessons and best
practices.

39. Considering the limited implementation experience in Myanmar, two midterm
reviews (MTRs) will be undertaken, at year two and year four, to assess the
progress, achievements, constraints, emerging impact and likely sustainability of
project activities and to make recommendations and necessary adjustments for the
remaining project periods. MTRs will be carried out jointly by the Government, the
PCU, PIOs and IFAD. At the end of the project, a project completion report will be
prepared by the Government, with support from IFAD.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
40. Total investment and incremental recurrent project costs, including physical and

price contingencies, are estimated at US$65.2 million over the six-year project
implementation period. The exchange rate has been set at 1,000 Myanmar kyats to
one United States dollar (the average rate prevailing at final design), and a
constant purchasing power parity exchange rate is assumed.

B. Project financing
41. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan on highly concessional terms of about

US$27.6 million (42 per cent of total costs), an IFAD grant of about US$1.5 million
(2 per cent), cofinancing of US$29.2 million (45 per cent), a government
contribution of about US$4.9 million (8 per cent), and a beneficiary contribution in
kind of US$2.0 million (3 per cent). The Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM) has



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

7

77

participated in the project design process and has expressed its intention to
cofinance the project.

Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower /
counterpart IFAD loan IFAD grant Cofinancier Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %
A. Strategic investments

1. Land development 3 042.5 4 513.5 - 29 172.5 - 36 728.4 56.3
2. Community agroforestry 134.2 4 457.0 - - 1 243.2 5 834.3 8.9

Subtotal 3 176.6 8 970.5 - 29 172.5 1 243.2 42 562.8 65.3
B. Enabling investments

1. Knowledge and technology 513.7 3 668.5 251.7 - 211.9 4 645.8 7.1
2. Services 113.4 10 292.5 95.0 - 566.4 11 067.3 17.0

Subtotal 627.1 13 961.0 346.7 - 778.3 15 713.1 24.1
C. Project management 1 126.5 4 632.6 1 154.4 - - 6 913.6 10.6

Total project costs 4 930.2 27 564.1 1 501.2 29 172.5 2 021.5 65 189.5 100.0

* Final disbursement categories will be decided during negotiations based on IFAD’s procedures, which will
include a maximum of five cost categories for reasons of efficiency.

Table 2
Indicative programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower/
counterpart IFAD loan IFAD grant Cofinancier Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Works 3 042.5 7.6 8 798.3 21.9 - - 28 407.6 70.6 - - 40 248.3 61.7
2. Vehicles 716.9 71.0 292.8 29.0 - - - - - - 1 009.7 1.5
3. Equipment and materials 7.1 7.6 86.6 92.4 - - - - - - 93.7 0.1
4. Consultancies 28.9 0.8 1 925.0 53.8 847.1 23.7 764.9 21.4 11.0 0.3 3 577.0 5.5
5. Training 197.9 1.6 2 943.5 64.5 654.1 14.3 - - 767.3 6.0 4 562.8 7.0
6. Goods services and inputs 235.3 6.9 1 945.6 56.8 - - - - 1 243.2 36.3 3 424.0 5.3
7. Matching grants and

associated investments - - 5 155.5 100 - - - - - - 5 155.5 7.9
8. Credit guarantee scheme - - 2 978.3 100 2 978.3 4.6
9. Staff salaries and

allowances 528.4 14.1 3 224.7 85.9 - - - - - - 3 753.1 5.8
10. Operating costs 173.3 44.8 213.9 55.2 - - - - - - 387.2 0.6

Total project costs 4 930.2 7.6 27 564.1 42.3 1 501.2 2.3 29 172.5 44.8 2 021.5 3.1 65 189.5 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
42. The project will directly impact an area of some 187,000 acres, of which

58,000 acres are irrigated, 104,000 are upland rainfed, and 25,000 are forest. It
will provide a range of economic and social benefits to 62,400 households
consisting of 315,000 rural women and men. Projections indicate that incremental
agricultural production in the project area from 2015 to 2021 will have an
estimated value of US$38.2 million at farm gate prices. The acreage cultivated is
expected to increase by 21 per cent, and cropping intensity by 22 per cent. Net
income per acre will increase by 64 per cent, while net income per household will
increase by 100 per cent.

43. The project's financial internal rate of return is estimated at 15.1 per cent. Its
economic internal rate of return is estimated at 13.4 per cent.

D. Sustainability
44. The sustainability of project investments will be fostered through: (i) access to

knowledge – KCs will be low-cost facilities that will eventually operate on a cost-
recovery basis, evolving into PPP ventures in the medium term; (ii) access to
markets – upgraded commodity chains, contract farming and outgrower schemes



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

8

88

will ensure smallholder access to markets sustained through underlying business
relationships; (iii) access to water – irrigation and drainage improvement, combined
with participatory water management, will improve water distribution, and
operation and maintenance; (iv) access to finance – financial inclusion activities will
eventually link smallholders and agroforestry households with the formal financial
sector; and (v) extension services – use of MOAI extension officers trained by the
project will ensure continuity in delivery of services.

45. The project’s exit strategy is to: strengthen public institutions at central and state
levels; rely on a range of institutional service providers for implementation of
activities; foster profitable business relationships between producers and markets;
and improve the capabilities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The key risks identified relate to: (i) insecure land tenure; (ii) political interference

in project management; (iii) poor governance capacity; and (iv) fiduciary risk.
These risks are mitigated by a set of assurances negotiated with the Government,
decentralization to the state level, participation in planning and implementation,
robust fiduciary compliance procedures, capacity-building of relevant institutions at
the state level, and intensive supervision and implementation support by IFAD.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

47. The ESAP is compliant with all relevant IFAD policies, in particular: (i) its targeting
strategy is consistent with the IFAD Targeting Policy approach of focusing on
economically active poor rural women and men; (ii) its investments in rural
economic growth are compliant with the IFAD Rural Finance Policy focus on
promoting inclusive financial systems; (iii) its participatory approach to land
development is consistent with the principles of free, prior and informed consent
and community-driven development stated in the IFAD policies on Improving
Access to Land and Tenure Security and Engagement with Indigenous Peoples;
(iv) its evolving gender mainstreaming strategy is in compliance with the IFAD
Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; (v) its focus on promoting
PPPs for private-sector development and policy dialogue is in line with the IFAD
Partnership Strategy; and (vi) its environmental impact assessment procedures for
infrastructure investment are aligned with the IFAD Climate Change Strategy for
proper adaptation and mitigation measures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
48. The project's rational is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and the

Government's policy on reducing economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with Myanmar's National Comprehensive Development Plan, the
Framework for Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development Action Plan. It is closely coordinated with the emerging agriculture
sector investments of partners such as the World Bank and the multi-donor
Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT).

Innovations and scaling upC.
49. The project is the first investment of its kind in the states inhabited primarily by

ethnic groups. It introduces several innovations in its model for sustainable
agricultural development in the upland/highland areas of Myanmar's eastern states.
Key innovations in the Myanmar context include: (i) introduction of a participatory
development approach; (ii) targeted delivery of technologies and services;
(iii) promotion of climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies;
(iv) livelihood diversification, with potential for higher value addition; (v) promotion
of smallholder-driven small and micro-businesses; and (vi) support for adapted
rural finance products and services.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

9

99

50. The Government considers the project a model that will eventually be scaled up in
upland/highland areas of Myanmar. The project adopts a modular approach, to the
extent feasible, in which a standard package of investment is designed to expand,
replicate, adapt and sustain successful investments. Through its investment tools
and forward-looking policy support, the project will create the pathways, drivers
and spaces for scaling up.

51. The Italian Development Cooperation has indicated its interest, in principle, in
providing parallel cofinancing to the Government to scale up the ESAP to an
additional eastern state.

Policy engagementD.
52. Policy engagement will take place on two levels. First, the project will contribute to

the analysis of policy issues related to implementation experiences. It will also
foster stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. Specifically,
the project is expected to provide evidence-based policy advice on agricultural and
rural development across upland areas – especially with regard to ethnic states.
The project will also support dialogue on technology, knowledge resources and
financial services in support of poor farm and landless households.

53. Second, the project will enhance IFAD’s direct policy engagement with the
Government and partners by channelling operational experiences in poverty
reduction to the appropriate policy and strategy discussions through platforms such
as sector working groups. These experiences provide unique opportunities to
identify policy gaps and formulate policy recommendations on issues affecting poor
rural people, and to generate an evidence base to inform policy discussions.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
54. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
annex.

55. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

56. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
57. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to 20 million
special drawing rights (SDR 20,000,000), approximately US$27.6 million, and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to 1.1 million special drawing
rights (SDR 1,100,000), approximately US$1.5 million, and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan for the Economic Transformation
Initiative - Gilgit-Baltistan

Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Economic Transformation Initiative - Gilgit-Baltistan

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Executing agency: Planning and Development Department, Provincial
Government of Gilgit-Baltistan

Total programme cost: US$120.15 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 48.55 million (equivalent to approximately
US$67 million)1

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional

Cofinancier(s): To be determined

Amount of cofinancing: US$22.98 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be determined

Contribution of borrower: US$23.63 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.54 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenditures not exceeding US$0.5 million
incurred between the date of Executive Board approval
and the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement

1 Including US$10 million cancelled, upon request by the Islamic Republic of Pakistan as the borrower, from the
financing for the Southern Punjab Poverty Alleviation Project (approved by the Executive Board at its 101st session, EB
2010/101/R.27/Rev.1). The proposed recommitment of the funds cancelled as such is in compliance with the rules and
procedures approved by the Executive Board in “Revision of IFAD approach to use of cancellation of approved loans
and/or grants” at its 111th session (EB 2014/111/R.12/Rev.1).



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Economic Transformation Initiative –
Gilgit-Baltistan, as contained in paragraph 43.

Proposed loan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the
Economic Transformation Initiative – Gilgit-Baltistan

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Pakistan has a total land area of 769,095 square kilometres. The estimated

population in 2013 was 184 million,2 of whom over 60 per cent live in rural areas.
In 2014, nominal GDP was an estimated US$ 246.6 billion and per capita GDP was
US$1,275.3 The services sector contributes the largest share to GDP – 53 per cent
– while agriculture and industry contribute 21 per cent and 24 per cent
respectively.

2. Pakistan is a relatively “young” country with over 55 per cent of the population
below the age of 25 and over 35 per cent between 25 and 54 years. Considerable
gender disparities exist on account of socio-economic, political and health factors,
and Pakistan is ranked 141st among 142 countries evaluated by the World
Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index in 2014. The adult literacy rate is 56
per cent but there are huge variations between the urban and rural population and
across regions. The unemployment rate is 6.7 per cent.4

3. The official poverty line in Pakistan is calorie-based and is defined as per capita
food and non-food expenditures per month to support food consumption equal to
2,350 calories per adult per day.5 A report based on the Household Income and
Expenditure Survey (HIES) of 2011 calculates the overall incidence of poverty to be
36.55 per cent, with rural poverty standing at 37.08 per cent and urban at 35.49
per cent.6 Poverty in remote and geographically challenging areas like Gilgit-
Baltistan is largely driven by the small size of landholdings, poor access to
markets, lack of access to credit, inputs and support services, limited off-farm
employment opportunities, and policy and institutional constraints.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. The Economic Transformation Initiative – Gilgit-Baltistan (ETI-GB) will directly
support the Government’s second poverty reduction strategy paper (2010), which
includes agriculture as one of the nine core pillars and which places special
emphasis on rural finance and on support for agriculture and small farmers,
microenterprises and small businesses, rural infrastructure, women’s development
and education as important means of poverty reduction.

2 Pakistan Bureau of Statistics, 2013.
3 Economist Intelligence Unit Report, 2014.
4 Pakistan Economic Survey, 2013-14, Finance Division, Government of Pakistan.
5 Ibid.
6 Haroon Jamal, Pakistan Poverty Statistics: Estimates for 2011, Research Report No.84.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

5. The ETI-GB is also aligned with IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) for 2010-2015 , in which Gilgit-Baltistan was prioritized in view of its
comparative deprivation and higher incidence of poverty and the earlier success of
the IFAD-funded Northern Areas Development Programme in improving the
livelihoods of the hard-to-reach poor in Gilgit-Baltistan.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
6. Gilgit-Baltistan is a highly mountainous and remote region in northern Pakistan

covering 72,500 square kilometres, with a population of about 1.3 million. A
distinctive feature of the region is that over 90 per cent of the inhabitants own
some agricultural land, as compared to 52 per cent in rest of the country. However,
the per capita holding is very small at 0.6-0.8 acres. Small farm sizes, long harsh
winters, mountainous terrain and other physical challenges result in consumption
levels that are lower than the national average. Dietary diversity is the poorest in
the country, and the incidence of stunting among children is estimated at an
alarming 36 per cent. A survey by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) in 2014 registers only 26 per cent of the population as food-
secure, 41 per cent as moderately food-insecure and 32 per cent as highly food-
insecure. The adult literacy rate is low, at 36 per cent, and the poverty incidence is
29 per cent as compared to 21 per cent for Pakistan overall.

7. Over 90 per cent of the region’s population is engaged in agriculture; therefore the
sector has a very important role for growth and poverty reduction. Traditionally,
apricot has been the most commonly produced food item in the region and this
continues to be the case. To capitalize on seasonal and elevation advantages, there
has been a move towards production of other high-value cash crops like fruits and
vegetables. Potato is the leading crop after apricots in terms of cultivated area and
production.

8. Smallholder farming households engaged in apricot and potato production with an
average landholding of less than one hectare (ha) will be the primary target group.
Other beneficiaries will include small-scale processors, trading and export
cooperatives, people engaged in value adding activities, input suppliers and
transporters. Gender will be mainstreamed in all aspects of the ETI-GB and youth
and women will be specifically targeted in skill development for relevant income
generation opportunities. The entry point for the initiative will be organized village
producers’ groups and marketing associations. In organizing these groups and
associations, the ETI-GB will build on the existing social capital generated by the
community organizations organized under other programmes in the region since
1982. An estimated 100,000 smallholder households, including women and youth,
will benefit directly from value chain and irrigation development activities. In
addition, about 100 local entrepreneurs will be assisted in scaling up their services
for different segments of value chains. About 10,000 persons will draw indirect
benefits from the upgrading of farm-to-market roads, extension, research and
other investments.

B. Development objective
9. The development objective is to increase agricultural incomes and employment for

at least 100,000 rural households in Gilgit-Baltistan region, as part of the overall
goal to improve incomes and reduce poverty and malnutrition in the region.

C. Components/outcomes
10. The seven-year operation will comprise of three mutually reinforcing components:

productive infrastructure; value chain development; and programme management
and policy support. These components will deliver five key outcomes: (i) 100,000
households increase their production, productivity and sales in key agricultural
commodities; (ii) a sustainable and community-driven development approach is



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

introduced, which is pro-poor and youth-, gender- and nutrition-sensitive; (iii) agri-
business actors invest in local production, processing and value addition to improve
marketing of local food products; (iv) government and private agricultural services
are sustainably improved and outreach expanded; and (5) the Government
formulates and enforces pro-poor agriculture policies.

11. The productive infrastructure component consists of two interlinked
subcomponents that will be underpinned by community mobilization and planning
activities in the four poorest districts, with the support of a competitively selected
social mobilization partner. These are, first, an irrigation subcomponent to scale up
the tried and tested community-based irrigation development approach, adding
50,000 acres of new irrigated land and providing an average of one acre of
irrigated land to participating households, including women-headed and landless
households. Participating households will also receive support in developing the
land. Second, a farm-to-market roads subcomponent will link existing production
areas and newly developed irrigated areas to main valley roads and trunk roads.
This will be achieved by upgrading 400 km of existing pony tracks to a standard
that allows use by all-terrain vehicles, and upgrading roads currently fit solely for
all-terrain vehicles to a standard that allows for truck transportation.

12. The value chain development component will be driven by a commercial and
market-centered approach whereby the initiative will identify priority valleys in
each of seven districts based on criteria that will include total population, number
of poor households, total production of priority crop, total cropped area, area
available for irrigation development and farm-to-market road needs. Coverage may
be expanded from the third year depending on progress and results. Within a
valley, interventions will start with villages with existing community organizations
that can be consolidated into larger village producer groups (VPGs). These
producer groups will provide the foundation for gradual expansion to all villages in
the valley and the organization of valley producers’ associations (VPAs).

13. The component will facilitate VPA engagement with private actors and other
partners. Contracts between VPAs and their purchasing partners will drive the
business plans of producers’ associations and the support from programme
implementing agencies. In particular, through its value chain technical assistance
team, the initiative will assist producers’ associations, processors and related
service providers in developing business plans and marketing strategies, increasing
product volume at an agreed quality standard, and accessing capital for
development to realize the full potential of their products. Where justified, capital
investments will be complemented by a value chain development fund using a
matching grants mechanism. The initiative will also build the capacity of
government extension and research agencies to effectively provide services to
VPGs and VPAs. Finally, the component will assist the Government in formulating
pro-poor policies and regulations for land records and titling, irrigation water usage
and management, road operation and maintenance, and developing effective
models for extension and research services.

14. The programme management and policy support component will put in place an
effective management and coordination system led by a steering committee
headed by a chief secretary of Gilgit-Balistan. A programme coordination unit
(PCU) will be established and will operate as an autonomous institution under the
guidance of the steering committee, and will be responsible for programme
planning and budgeting, coordination, monitoring, procurement and annual audits,
as well as management of the value chain development fund. The PCU will also
assist government departments with policy development and implementation. The
PCU will ensure that gender, youth, environment, knowledge management and
communication considerations are integrated into all aspects of programme
management and implementation.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

15. The ETI-GB’s approach is founded on expanding the crop area, improving per-
household land holdings, and modernizing agricultural practices, thereby
transforming the rural economy from deficit/subsistence agriculture to commercial
production with marketable surpluses and more specialized, high-value agriculture
that is responsive to market demands and appropriate for the region’s comparative
advantages. A participatory and community-centered approach to land and water
development will be followed, consistent with the existing traditional practices and
community-based systems in Gilgit-Baltistan. Once a scheme is selected in
accordance with the initiative’s results-based criteria, the social mobilization
partner and implementing agency staff will involve selected communities in
decisions on terms and conditions that relate to them; the implementing agency’s
roles and responsibilities; land ownership; water availability and ownership;
equitable distribution of developed land; identification of beneficiaries including
women-headed and landless households; irrigation scheme implementation
strategy and timelines, etc. Before construction is initiated, a water users’
association, representative of all the beneficiaries, will be established to engage
with the implementing agency, the social mobilization partner and (where one is
required) the contractor. The initiative will also invest in training and equipping 40
youth construction groups for irrigation schemes, to be engaged by communities/
contractors for construction works.

16. Complementing the increase in production, the initiative will support a holistic and
demand-driven approach to value chain development (initially for apricot and
potato; subsequently, other promising products may be pursued). The entry point
for the value chain support will be the organized groups of farmers at village level,
with due regard for women and youth. Organizing smallholder farmers into
producers’ groups and formulating value chain development plans will be the key
elements to address aggregation, quality and marketing challenges. This approach
will involve education, capacity-building and networking of key stakeholders along
the entire value chain, backed by enabling policy support. At the core of this
approach will be a partnership brokerage model, whereby producers and farmers,
public services and private actors will be linked in mutually responsible
partnerships. The strategy is expected to develop capacity and networks for
sustainable expansion of production and marketable surpluses, resulting in
increased incomes and poverty reduction.

17. The initiative will actively engage existing and newly formed women producers’
groups within the target valleys to ascertain women’s priorities in terms of value
chain development, irrigation development and social development. Apart from
actively encouraging and creating opportunities for participation in VPGs, the
initiative will establish 20 women producers’ groups. Suitable opportunities for
women in the local socio-cultural setting will also be identified, such as grading,
packaging, polishing, processing, and women will receive training for such jobs.
Women-centered value chain activities will be another area of focus, including milk
marketing groups and apricot by-product processing. The initiative will introduce
labour-saving devices/equipment for women in order to address the constraints
that result from their disproportionate burden of harvesting, post-harvest shelling,
processing, drying of products, etc. To complement the anticipated effects of
improved infrastructure and higher incomes on nutrition, the ETI-GB shall also
provide training in nutrition to participating households.

B. Organizational framework
18. While the Government of Pakistan’s Economic Affairs Division will be the main

coordinating agency for IFAD financing, the Planning and Development Department
of the provincial government of Gilgit-Baltistan will be the lead executing agency,



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

overseeing implementation through an empowered and autonomous PCU.
Implementation will follow a hybrid model where different components/activities
will be implemented by different public agencies, NGOs and private-sector service
providers, coordinated by the PCU.

19. Subregional coordination units will be established in each of the three regions, i.e.
Gilgit, Diamer and Baltistan. These units will be responsible for planning,
coordination and monitoring of activities in the target valleys and villages in
collaboration with the social mobilization partner, the value chain technical
assistance team and line departments. The main implementing partners will be
(i) social mobilization partners/NGOs, competitively selected; (ii) a value chain
technical assistance team; and (iii) a range of private-sector partners including
local entrepreneurs, apricot processors and exporters, corporate and commercial
buyers of seed and table potato, input supply companies; and (iv) around 220
VPGs (20 of which will be women’s associations), 20 VPAs and four to five regional
producers’ associations.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. The annual workplan and budget (AWPB) represents the key planning document for
the initiative. The plan’s format will follow the logical framework, including clearly
spelled out monitoring indicators that can be easily measured and reported. The
overall responsibility for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities will lie with the
PCU. The planning, monitoring and evaluation (PME) system will be finalized and
made operational, in consultation with all implementing partners, within the first
six months of start-up. The PME system will be part of an overall information,
knowledge management and communication system that will provide timely and
accurate information on implementation progress and feedback for management
decision-making. A baseline survey will be conducted, preferably before start-up,
but at the latest by the end of the third month of implementation to establish
benchmarks based on the logical framework/Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS) related to outcomes and results vis-à-vis beneficiaries. Indicators
will be disaggregated by gender and socio-economic status to the extent possible
to allow for a proper assessment of whether the target beneficiaries are being
reached.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
21. An assessment of the financial management system was carried out to verify

compliance with IFAD’s requirements in terms of fiduciary risk. This risk,
considered high due to the remote location and weak capacity at the decentralized
level, is deemed mitigated to “medium’’ by a set of measures. These include
recruitment of qualified financial staff under performance-based contracts;
quarterly financial reporting; issuance of payments to implementing partners based
on certified statements of expenditure subject to internal and external audit; and
regular joint monitoring of ETI-GB accounts by the PCU, IFAD, the Government of
Gilgit-Baltistan, each within the context of its remit.

22. The PCU will be responsible for financial management and for coordinating and
consolidating all financial reports from implementing partners. The PCU will
maintain a full set of accounts in accordance with IFAD’s requirements and
internationally accepted accounting standards.

23. The annual external audit of expenditures will be carried out by the Auditor-
General of Pakistan, whose role includes the audit of all public resources. These
audit reports will be made available within six months of the close of financial year,
in line with IFAD’s guidelines.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

24. Internal audit services will be provided by a specialized private firm in the first two
years of implementation, with reports made available to the PCU, IFAD and the
Government of Gilgit-Baltistan.

25. Budgeting. AWPBs will be prepared by the PCU in collaboration with the
implementing agencies, for the approval of the programme steering committee and
IFAD.

26. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened in the State Bank of Pakistan
for receipt of loan proceeds, with a sub-account in Pakistani rupees. A PCU-
operated programme account will receive funds from the sub-account in order to
meet the PCU’s procurement and implementation obligations. Each of the PCUs and
partner agencies will open dedicated sub-accounts for the receipt of funds against
agreed AWPBs, periodic expenditure statements and expenditure returns. All fund-
flows will be based on the imprest account modality.

27. Procurement. The PCU will be responsible and accountable for procurement of
goods, works and consultancy services, which will be carried out in accordance with
IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook (2010). Procurement
will follow procurement plans approved by IFAD. Specific procurement methods,
prior review arrangements, estimated costs and time frames, and risk mitigation
measures will be defined in the letter to the borrower and reflected in the
procurement plan. The programme implementation manual will detail procurement
procedures, processes and management arrangements.

E. Supervision
28. Supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD, in collaboration with the

Government and the cofinanciers. The supervision plan will include two supervision
missions annually in the first two years. Additional implementation support
missions will be organized by the IFAD country office as needed. Supervision and
implementation support will encompass: (i) fiduciary compliance with attention to
legal conditions, financial management, disbursement, procurement and
contracting; (ii) implementation performance, progress towards objectives,
investments and outputs, governance and management, targeting and gender
mainstreaming; and (iii) implementation support to provide guidance and
assistance. Implementation support will incorporate a country programme
perspective by introducing a broad view of development investments, influencing
policy and practices based on operational experiences, developing systems and
institutions for poverty reduction, facilitating financial and knowledge partnerships,
and generating lessons and best practices.

IV. Costs, financing, benefits
A. Costs
29. The total cost of the initiative, including price contingencies (16 per cent) and

physical contingencies (3 per cent), is estimated at US$120 million. The foreign
exchange component is estimated at US$8 million.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Component cost summary

B. Financing
30. Total costs are estimated at US$120 million. Of this, the Government will

contribute US$24 million (20 per cent) to finance taxes, salaries, operating costs
and certain other expenditures. IFAD will provide highly concessional financing
equivalent to US$67 million and the beneficiaries an estimated US$7 million.
Several donors have expressed an interest in cofinancing the initiative.
Negotiations are currently ongoing to fund the remaining financing gap of US$23
million.
Table 2
Costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiary
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Investment cost
1. Civil works 35.03 50.7 13.29 19.2 6.54 9.5 14.26 20.6 69.12
2. Equipment and materials 0.38 60.0 0.14 23.0 - - 0.11 17.0 0.63
3. Trainings 3.67 50.9 1.39 19.2 - - 2.16 29.9 7.22
4. Vehicles 0.25 32.5 0.09 12.0 - - 0.42 55.5 0.76
5. Grants and subsidies 16.28 81.0 3.82 19.0 - - - - 20.10
6. Consultancy 0.19 52.0 0.08 23.0 - - 0.09 25.0 0.36
7. Technical assistance 0.95 51.0 0.35 19.0 - - 0.56 30.0 1.87

Total investment cost 56.76 19.17 6.54 17.60 100.06
Recurrent cost
8. Salaries and allowances 6.51 51.0 2.43 19.0 - - 3.83 30.0 12.77
9. Operating costs 3.73 51.0 1.39 19.0 - - 2.19 30.0 7.32

Total recurrent cost 10.25 3.82 - 6.03 20.09
Total 67.00 55.8 22.98 19.1 6.54 5.4 23.63 19.7 120.15

31. Retroactive financing. An exception to the IFAD General Conditions is foreseen
to allow retroactive financing of eligible expenditures for certain activities before
the financing agreement enters into force. Such expenses will be reimbursable by
IFAD when the financing becomes disbursable. The exact activities and amounts to
be considered eligible for retroactive financing include limited operating costs; the

(Pak Rs '000) (US$ Million)
% % Total % % Total

Foreign Base Foreign Base
Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs

A. Productive Infrastructure
1. Irrigation & Land Development 4 112 473 434 811 4 547 284 10 44 40.12 4.24 44.36 10 44
2. Farm to Market Roads 1 576 450 174 506 1 750 956 10 17 15.38 1.70 17.08 10 17

Subtotal Productive Infrastructure 5 688 923 609 317 6 298 241 10 61 55.50 5.94 61.45 10 61
B. Value Chain Development

1. Vaue Chain Fund 1 986 966 92 570 2 079 535 4 20 19.39 0.90 20.29 4 20
2. Social Mobilization 398 893 12 337 411 230 3 4 3.89 0.12 4.01 3 4
3. Agri Extension 210 673 7 580 218 253 3 2 2.06 0.07 2.13 3 2
4. Agri Research 262 382 13 415 275 797 5 3 2.56 0.13 2.69 5 3
5. Land Titling & Record system 214 861 3 208 218 069 1 2 2.10 0.03 2.13 1 2

Subtotal Value Chain Development 3 073 774 129 110 3 202 884 4 31 29.99 1.26 31.25 4 31
C. Programme Coordination Unit 830 692 22 733 853 425 3 8 8.10 0.22 8.33 3 8
Total BASELINE COSTS 9 593 389 761 161 10 354 550 7 100 93.59 7.43 101.02 7 100

Physical Contingencies 297 229 30 028 327 256 9 3 2.90 0.29 3.19 9 3
Price Contingencies 2 118 263 56 082 2 174 346 3 21 15.74 0.20 15.94 1 16

Total PROJECT COSTS 12 008 881 847 271 12 856 152 7 124 112.23 7.92 120.15 7 119



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

cost of the recruitment process and key equipment; the cost of installing
accounting software and preparing a finance manual; and the costs of carrying out
baseline surveys and recruiting a service provider for social mobilization. The
amount of retroactive financing will be determined during negotiations and will not
exceed US$500,000. The Government of Pakistan agrees to make provision for this
financing initially and will be reimbursed for all eligible expenditures from IFAD
financing. The effective date for the retroactive financing will be the date of the
Executive Board’s approval of the financing.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. About 100,000 smallholder households, landless households with unemployed

youth, and women-headed households will benefit directly from the ETI-GB
interventions. Another 10,000 smallholders, daily wage workers, artisans, masons,
etc. will also derive direct and indirect benefits from the interventions. Around 100
people involved in processing, adding value and providing other services along the
value chain will also benefit. The main benefits will be derived from:

(a) An additional 50,000 acres of newly irrigated land, increasing the local
irrigated area by around 30 per cent;

(b) The upgrading of 400 km of roads, which will reduce transportation costs and
enable farmers to transport bigger quantities of better quality;

(c) The injection of about US$25 million into the rural economy through labour
payments for irrigation development, of which about US$23 million will be
recovered and reinvested in the same villages for socio-economic
development, in addition to employment generated in upgrading roads and
food processing;

(d) The provision of a range of capacity-building, local processing, storage and
value addition facilities in support of 220 village producers’ associations;

(e) Sustainable, market-oriented improvements in potato seeds and fruit plant
production, processing and marketing systems;

(f) Strengthening of agriculture extension and agriculture research, and
capacity-building of the Water Management Directorate, Public Works
Department for better service delivery, commensurate with the status of a
provincial agency; and

(g) Policy formulation and reform in critical areas of water management, road
O&M, and land records and titling to ensure improved service delivery, better
governance and sustainability.

D. Sustainability
33. Sustainability will be promoted by engaging community-based groups and

organizations in all activities; upgrading existing systems, practices and structures
already present in the region; achieving scale efficiencies; and investing in
improving access and reducing the high transaction costs prevailing in this remote
region; and generating a commercial basis for future revenue generation by local
governments. Complementary features aimed at strengthening prospects for
sustainability include: (i) emphasizing creation of independent commercial win-win
relationships between the producers and private-sector buyers; (ii) developing
private local processing and value addition industry to create alternative avenues
for marketing of products; and (iii) strengthening the enabling environment
through support to development of local policy and regulatory systems.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
34. Security is a key area of concern for IFAD’s country programme in Pakistan. By

providing an inclusive and expansive development initiative that benefits rural
communities across the region, the ETI-GB is expected to mitigate possible ethnic,



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

religious or tribal tensions. Moreover, as the target area is of strategic importance
for the Pakistan-China economic corridor and for the national water and power
supply, both the federal Government and the provincial government of Gilgit-
Baltistan are placing significant emphasis on ensuring adequate security personnel
to maintain law and order in the area.

35. As this will be the largest development initiative to date in Gilgit-Baltistan, the
capacity of a relatively young provincial government to implement such a large-
scale intervention is another area of risk. The region has only recently been
granted provincial status, and its institutional capacities may still not be up to the
level needed to effectively implement a large development operation. The design
has therefore made provisions for capacity-building of Government services,
competitive packages for key programme staff to be recruited from the private
sector and engagement of experienced NGOs as service providers for field
implementation.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. The initiative is in line with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015. The
activities, implementation arrangements and M&E system have been designed in
compliance with the IFAD Policy on Targeting, and in line with the approaches
outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Programme Management
Department (PMD) Operations. The initiative is consistent with the IFAD Private-
Sector Development and Partnership Strategy. Management and operation of the
proposed value chain development fund are aligned with the IFAD Rural Finance
Policy and the IFAD decision tools for rural finance. A detailed environmental
assessment has been undertaken, which determined that the intervention is
aligned with both the IFAD Climate Change Strategy and the Environment and
Natural Resource Management Policy. The assessment confirmed that the water
sources that would be tapped for irrigation are not at threat; and that the
incremental effect of additional water use is negligible. Although some scientific
projections expect overall faster glacial melt in the Himalayas, studies specific to
the Karakoram region (where this programme is located) find that glaciers are
expanding due to different climatic phenomena as compared to the western
Himalayas. The ETI-GB’s environmental classification is Category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. IFAD will coordinate activities closely with other donor agencies active at present or

in the recent past in the area and will also pursue possibilities of cofinancing from
such sources as Italy, the United States Agency for International Development, the
Japanese International Cooperation Agency and the World Food Programme (WFP).
The design has already benefited from lessons learned in the past and ongoing
programmes of these agencies. IFAD is also working in partnership with WFP to
carry out hazard mapping of the target area and related communication
infrastructure. The possibilities of extending WFP’s school feeding programme and
food-for-work programme to the ETI-GB target area are being discussed with the
WFP country office.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. Attempts will be made to introduce several innovative aspects to the target area:

(a) Mutually responsible commercial relationships between the private/corporate
sector and groups of smallholder farmers that address the quality and volume
concerns of the buyers and price, market predictability and trust concerns of
the sellers;

(b) Instead of following the traditional 20 per cent community contribution
approach, the ETI-GB will sponsor construction of water schemes and land



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

development at full cost, thereby injecting about US$30 million into the local
rural economy in the shape of wages. Benefiting households will be required
to pay back 50 per cent of these costs, but over three crop seasons and into
a community account that would be used for additional infrastructure, value
chain facilities, and social development needs as per agreed village
development plans;

(c) A value chain development fund, operating on a matching grant basis,
covering the full range of products and entire region;

(d) Piloting of cost-effective water-lifting systems along main rivers with the
potential to add thousands of additional acres to agriculture production
system.

Policy engagementD.
39. Policy formulation support will be provided to the Government in relation to value

chain development and priority areas for investments. These include land
settlement and titling, irrigation water policy, road O&M policy, seed and product
certification and quality certification. The IFAD Country Office in Islamabad will
facilitate cross-fertilization between the proposed initiative and other IFAD-funded
projects in the country in these policy areas. In particular, the IFAD-funded
Livestock and Access to Markets Project in Punjab incorporates a value chain
approach that also seeks to engage with government policies, allowing IFAD to
feed bottom-up, pro-poor perspectives into national policy dialogue processes in
areas of key concern for rural poverty reduction in the country.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
40. A financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

41. The Islamic Republic of Pakistan is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

42. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
43. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in an amount equivalent to forty-eight
million five hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 48,550,000),
and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance
with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of the
Philippines for the Convergence on Value
Chain Enhancement for Rural Growth and
Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)

Republic of the Philippines

Convergence on Value Chain Enhancement for Rural
Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of the Philippines

Executing agency: Department of Agrarian Reform

Total project cost: US$52.53 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 22.8 million (equivalent to approximately
US$25.01 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 15-18 years, including a
grace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest
rate

Contribution of borrower: US$9.59 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$17.93 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Philippines for the Convergence on Value Chain
Enhancement for Rural Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE), as
contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the
Convergence on Value Chain Enhancement for Rural
Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)
I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. In 2009 the population was 92.2 million and growing at 2.04 per cent annually. In

2010, gross national income per capita was US$4,002 (in 2008 dollars). Since 1981
GDP growth has averaged 3.1 per cent per annum, but only 2.3 per cent per
annum from 2001 to 2010. Over the period 2004-2010, the headline inflation rate
averaged 5.6 per cent. The Human Development Index of 0.638 in 2010 ranked
the country 97th among 169 countries, whereas in 1998 it was 0.744, which shows
that, over those 12 years, development efforts were unable to improve the human
development status. The gender development index decreased from 0.768 in 2005
to 0.742 in 2008 and the gender empowerment measure fell from 0.590 in 2005 to
0.560 in 2008. The national poverty incidence decreased slightly, from
21.1 per cent of families in 2006 to 20.9 in 2009. But with population growth, the
number of poor families rose from 3.67 million to 3.86 million in the same period,
higher than in 2003. Farmers and fishers were the poorest groups in the country,
with a poverty incidence of 44 and 50 per cent, respectively, in 2006. Nationally,
income inequality remains high, with a Gini coefficient of 0.448.

2. The failure to reduce poverty in recent years reflects underinvestment and the slow
growth of per capita incomes, high population growth and dependency rates,
natural disasters and inflationary pressures, mainly from rising fuel and food
prices. Despite the recent lack of progress in reducing the incidence of poverty, the
Philippines Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016 envisages that the country can still
achieve Millennium Development Goal poverty reduction targets by 2015.
Favourable factors exist that may help the country break out of its perennial
condition of widespread rural poverty, inequity and lagging human development,
including a healthy external payments situation, years of trade reform (leaving an
industrial sector fairly undistorted by subsidies and heavy protection), a stable
currency, low inflation and positive political developments.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The proposed project is consistent with the PDP 2011-2016, the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015 and the IFAD country strategy for the Philippines for 2010-
2014. The rationale for IFAD’s help in financing the project is to: (i) exploit
opportunities to support the agrarian reform process and help meet the needs of
under- and unserved agrarian reform beneficiaries (ARBs) – through a value chain
approach to enhance agricultural growth and agribusiness development – in order
to maximize benefits from the land distribution programme; (ii) support
harmonization of rural development efforts by the Departments of Agrarian Reform
(DAR), Agriculture (DA) and Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), and
other agencies engaged in agribusiness development, in order to maximize impact
in rural poverty reduction; and (iii) support the DAR approach of clustering
agrarian reform communities to realize economies of scale for production, access to



EB 2015/115/R.13

2

markets and service provision in order to benefit from value chain development.
The project will contribute to the PDP’s goal of a competitive and sustainable
agriculture and fisheries sector through improved food security and increased rural
incomes, and it supports the national Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Programme.

4. The project is part of the National Convergence Initiative (NCI), which seeks to
synchronize the initiatives of the three departments engaged in rural development
– DAR, DA and DENR – and optimize use of the resources available to support
sustainable rural development. Linkages will be built with the Department of Trade
and Industry (DTI) under the Rural Microenterprise Promotion Programme, with
the DA under the Second Cordillera Highland Agricultural Resource Management
Project and with the DENR under the Integrated Natural Resources and
Environmental Management Project approved by the Executive Board in December
2012. Lessons learned in ongoing and previous projects have been incorporated
into the design.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will target Regions IX, X and Caraga, located in the west, north and

north-east of Mindanao, which are the three poorest regions of the country,
accounting for 18 per cent of those living below the national poverty line. Within
the three regions, the project will target 11 agrarian reform community (ARC)
clusters, including 93 ARCs in 48 municipalities in 10 provinces. The target group
includes ARBs, other smallholders, under- or unemployed rural youth, indigenous
peoples (IPs), women, and business development partners, including eligible
people’s organizations (POs). The total size of the target group is estimated at
144,732 agricultural households (about 773,106 people), including non-ARC
barangays (villages) and IP households. Of this total, ARBs account for 59,217
households, of which 30 per cent are headed by women. The major crops
cultivated include coconut, rice, maize, rubber, banana, high-value vegetables, oil
palm, coffee and cassava. Some 29 per cent of ARC average incomes are below the
poverty line.

B. Project development objective
6. The overall goal of the project is to contribute to the reduction of poverty incidence

in the 10 target provinces of Regions IX, X and Caraga. The project’s development
objective is to enable ARBs and other smallholder farmers in the 10 target
provinces of Regions IX, X and Caraga to become highly productive and
competitive entrepreneurs and contribute to the achievement of broad-based rural
economic growth. The expected impact and outcome indicators for the
approximately 35,000 households and 100 POs (e.g. farmers’ cooperatives and
associations) in the 11 ARC clusters include: (i) average annual income increased;
(ii) increased farm income derived from new farming activities; (iii) increased
ownership of household assets; and (iv) reduced prevalence of child malnutrition.

C. Components/outcomes
7. The project has the following components: (1) participatory value chain analysis

and planning; (2) integrated smallholder agricultural and rural enterprise
development; (3) subdivision of collective certificates of land ownership award and
facilitation of land transfer programme; and (4) project management, monitoring
and evaluation and knowledge management.

8. Component 1: Participatory value chain analysis and planning. The expected
outcome of this component will be that value-chain business development plans for
selected crops are validated and implemented, resulting in improved farm income.
In each of the 11 ARC clusters, the component will support: (i) validation of the
proposals for value chain development as identified by the feasibility studies;
(ii) identification of the gaps and inefficiencies in the value chains and of the
solutions and investments required; (iii) identification of POs and private-sector



EB 2015/115/R.13

3

organizations wishing to and capable of participating in value chain development;
and (iv) updated ARC value chain investment plans (ARC-VIPs).

9. Component 2: Integrated smallholder agricultural and rural enterprise
development. The expected outcome of this component is improved production,
value addition and marketing of selected agricultural commodities. The component
has two subcomponents: (i) farm and value chain enterprise development; and
(ii) investment in value chain-related rural infrastructure.

10. Under farm and value chain enterprise development, the project will support
improvement of the quantity and quality of production at the farm level and the
phasing of production to meet market demand. It will achieve this through farmer
training, capacity-building and the provision of technical and farm management
advice in product testing, soil analysis, production technologies and management,
adaptation to threats from climate change, environmental awareness-raising and
good agricultural practices. This will involve the private sector (e.g. extension
personnel employed by buyers or consolidators) and/or public-sector agencies (e.g.
DAR development facilitators, technical staff of local government units (LGUs) and
the Agricultural Training Institute). In the area of value addition and diversification,
the project will facilitate the creation of appropriate business models and of the
institutional structures required to enable smallholders and their organizations to
engage in value addition and enterprise development, with private-sector
management of these value chains. The project aims to increase farmer share in
value chains through product differentiation and the already-mentioned value
addition and diversification. Project interventions will be implemented through the
provision of matching grants when there is a clear opportunity to improve
profitability for the target group. Other investments to enhance value addition
include the provision of assistance for product development, branding, packaging,
logistics, certification/accreditation, technology and equipment upgrading, and
organizational development through training with a focus on meeting market
requirements. The project will provide investments, on a cost-sharing basis, to
match the contributions of private-sector participants for eligible proposals and for
financing the equipment associated with post-harvest facilities.

11. In the area of market and investment facilitation, the project will develop linkages
within the value chain among input providers, producers and buyers to enhance
the profitability of farm enterprises. Assistance in consolidating supplies to meet
the volume and frequency requirements of buyers and investors is part of this
process. The assistance provided will include support for improving and/or
extending existing market information systems, trade fairs, business and investors’
forums, and assistance in negotiations with buyers and investors for leasehold,
contract growing, joint venture or marketing arrangements. The project will make
use of the expertise of agencies such as DA, DENR, DTI and the Department of
Science and Technology (DOST) to enable target beneficiaries to optimize
production of their chosen commodities, improve their market access and
competiveness, generate greater profits and provide a more integrated package of
services in the priority chains to be developed. The project will also assist project
beneficiaries in accessing funding from the banking and microfinance sectors using
a combination of approaches: private-sector enterprises involved in the value
chain; project matching grant funds to farmers, POs and private-sector
organizations meeting strict eligibility criteria for investments; development of the
capacity of viable farmers’ organizations to access finance from the formal banking
sector, government finance institutions and microfinance institutions; and linkages
with financial institutions to develop appropriate financing packages and products
for the value chain initiatives.



EB 2015/115/R.13

4

12. Under investment in value chain-related rural infrastructure, after participatory
planning with target ARCs and target group members, the project will invest in
rural infrastructure subprojects meeting eligibility and priorities criteria to support
value chain development. Eligible infrastructure includes farm-to-market roads,
rehabilitation/restoration of communal irrigation schemes (CISs), water-harvesting
and management, post-harvest facilities (storage, auction centres, etc.) and water
supply required to process local produce for value chain development. Irrigators’
associations and farmers’ groups/associations will operate and maintain CISs and
post-harvest facilities, while LGUs will maintain the farm-to-market roads.
Investments in additional road construction will take place only after firm funding
has been secured from participating LGUs. In addition, the capacity of LGUs to fund
and undertake maintenance of the roads will be closely monitored.

13. Component 3: Subdivision of collective certificates of landownership
award (CLOA) and facilitation of land transfer program. This component will
cover the subdivision of CLOAs and facilitation of land transfer action to stabilize
ownership and property rights in the project areas. This will provide incentive to
farmers to make their lands more productive and enable them to access credit and
engage in agribusiness projects with private investors. Target outputs and
outcomes for this component will be under the regular programme of DAR and will
be funded under the regular budget of DAR.

14. Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation and
knowledge management. The expected outcome of this component is that the
project is completed on time, within the agreed budget, and to the satisfaction of
beneficiaries. The output will be timely, cost-effective and transparent
management that is gender and culturally sensitive. The component will finance
the costs of project management and coordination, monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and reporting activities at national, regional and provincial levels. It will also
finance the costs of contracted project staff based in the central project
management office (CPMO) in Mindanao, the three regional project management
offices (RPMOs) and in the 11 provincial project management offices (PPMOs),
honorariums of DAR regular staff assigned to the project, equipment, vehicles,
short-term consultants, training, preparation of project manuals, case studies and
operating costs.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The key elements of the overall project approach are: (i) use of a participatory
value chain development approach to enable target beneficiaries to optimize
production of their chosen commodities, sustainably improve the profitability of
household farm enterprises, improve their market access and competiveness and
generate greater profits; (ii) application of convergence in implementing project
activities under the leadership of DAR to enhance the investment and opportunity
climate for agribusiness; (iii) use of the ARC clustering approach for the provision
of support to ARCs for value chain development; (iv) implementation through DAR,
at all levels, with the participation of the other agencies (e.g. DTI, DOST, LGUs and
the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples [NCIP]); and (v) emphasis on
knowledge management (KM) and learning to ensure that experience and lessons
learned are available to improve project performance and for scaling up and wider
dissemination.

16. The project implementation period is six years. The implementation strategy will
include: (i) geographic targeting to identify the project areas and provide a
preliminary list of target commodities based on the 11 feasibility studies and
investment plans already prepared; (ii) selection of private sector organizations to
provide marketing and/or other services that meet the proposed eligibility criteria
during the initial participatory value chain analysis and planning phase; (iii) self-
targeting by members of the target group based on their interest in participating in



EB 2015/115/R.13

5

project activities; (iv) non-poor households will be targeted through their inclusion
in the POs or other types of organizations formed; and (v) provision of public
goods, such as improved farm to market roads, rehabilitated CISs, post-harvest
facilities, etc. Consultations were held with the NCIP, the organization charged with
supporting the integration of IPs in the mainstream. The approach to working with
IPs as a sub-group of the target group will work within the framework of the NCIP’s
Ancestral Domain Sustainable Development and Protection Plan. This approach
involves putting into practice the principle of free and prior informed
consultation/consent on all project activities by providing adequate information.

B. Organizational framework
17. DAR will be the lead agency for project implementation, in cooperation with DA,

DENR, DTI and DOST. DAR has the necessary institutional capacity and structure to
undertake this role and the experience gained from implementing over 60
externally funded projects – including two recently completed IFAD projects that
were implemented satisfactorily in Mindanao. DAR has staff at all levels of
government, down to the municipal level (municipal agrarian reform officers), and
a development facilitator assigned to each of the 11 ARCs to work with
beneficiaries. The project management structure involves a CPMO based in
Cagayan de Oro (Region X); RPMOs in each of the three regions; and PPMOs in
each of the 10 provinces (two operational divisions in Bukidnon). The oversight
structure includes a project steering committee at the national level as the
project’s policymaking body; a regional multi-stakeholders committee (RMSC) in
each of the three regions to advise regional project implementers on major policy
considerations and technical and operational issues and to ensure participation of
the region-based agencies in project implementation; and a cluster project
operations team (CPOT) in each of the 11 ARC clusters to serve as coordinating
mechanisms for delivery of government services to the clusters.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. At start-up, project staff and stakeholders at national and regional levels will
prepare a multi-year global workplan and budget for achieving project objectives
and targets, for approval by the project steering committee. Participatory planning
of annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs) will start at the barangay and ARC
cluster levels, involving representatives of the ARCs, CPOTs and PPMOs. The
project will have a results-based M&E system to report the status of project
implementation and progress on outputs, outcomes and impact. The overall M&E
system will consist of regular reports and process monitoring by the CPMO, based
on data provided by RPMOs, PPMOs and implementing agencies, and
communicating the project’s physical progress data and financial accounts,
maintained by the CPMO and regional/provincial offices. During the first project
year (PY1), DAR will undertake a baseline survey to cover all indicators of the
logical framework, including RIMS indicators, and, subsequently, midterm impact
and completion impact surveys. M&E and KM units will be established in all
implementation levels. M&E documentation results will contribute to policy studies
to improve the business environment for smallholder farmers in the Philippines,
with a view to scaling up within the country.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management of the project will follow government systems, rules and

regulations for receipts and disbursements of proceeds from the loan – to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s standard disbursement procedures. The
Bureau of the Treasury, through DAR, will maintain one designated account
exclusively for the loan. DAR, through the CPMO, will be responsible for overall
management of project funds, which includes: oversight of project operations,
procurement, internal control, accounting, review and consolidation of project
AWP/Bs, physical and financial reporting, audits; and consolidation of accounts and



EB 2015/115/R.13

6

withdrawal applications. RPMOs and PPMOs will be accountable for project funds
received for implementation of the project. DAR will execute a memorandum of
agreement with each of the partner implementing agencies at national, regional,
provincial and municipal levels to specify the services and support to be provided
by each agency and by the project.

20. IFAD’s review of the project implementation manual (PIM) will be a precondition of
disbursement. Guidelines in the PIM will be consistent with the Government’s and
IFAD policies, systems and procedures. Annual financial statements on project
funds will be prepared in accordance with acceptable accounting standards, such as
the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the International Public
Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), or national standards where these are
converging towards internationally recognized best practice and/or are deemed to
provide minimum disclosures.

21. The project’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually in
accordance with IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. All project accounts will be
audited, including all sources of funding. Annual audit reports will be submitted to
IFAD within six months after the end of each fiscal year.

22. The project will follow government procurement regulations (RA 9184) using the
latest implementing rules and regulations – to the extent that they are consistent
with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines. IFAD will apply a zero-tolerance policy
to fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions.

E. Supervision
23. Annually, IFAD and the National Economic Development Authority will jointly

conduct a full supervision and implementation support mission, and a post-
supervision mission 6 to 9 months later, depending on progress.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
24. Project costs are estimated at about US$52.53 million over a six-year

implementation period, including taxes and duties estimated at US$5.96 million or
11 per cent of total costs. Price contingencies of 3 per cent, and physical
contingencies have been computed at 3.5 per cent of base costs on all items, both
decided by the National Economic and Development Authority.

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
Loan Government LGUs

Beneficiary/
proponent Total

Components Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Participatory value chain analysis and planning 0.58 63.5 0.34 36.5 - - - - 0.92 1.8
2. Integrated smallholder agricultural and rural

enterprise development

i. Farm and value chain enterprise development 11.78 35.6 1.72 5.2 2.01 6.1 17.56 53.1 33.07 63.0

ii. Value chain related rural Infrastructure 10.86 79.0 1.05 7.6 1.47 10.7 0.37 2.7 13.74 26.2

Subtotal 22.63 48.3 2.77 5.9 3.48 7.4 17.93 38.3 46.81 89.1

3. Project management, M&E and KM

1. M&E and KM 0.93 50.9 0.90 49.1 - - - - 1.83 3.5

2. Project management 0.86 29.0 2.10 71.0 - - - - 2.96 5.6

Subtotal 1.80 37.4 3.00 62.6 - - - - 4.80 9.1
Total 25.01 47.6 6.11 11.6 3.48 6.6 17.93 34.1 52.53 100.0



EB 2015/115/R.13

7

B. Project financing
25. Project financing comprises: (i) an IFAD loan of US$25.01 million (47.6 per cent);

(ii) contribution of the borrower for US$9.59 made of national government
counterpart funding of US$6.08 million (11.6 per cent) and LGU financing of
US$3.51 million (6.6 per cent); and (iii) contributions from proponents and
beneficiaries of about US$17.93 million (34.1 per cent). The financing plan by
expenditure category and financier is presented in table 2 below. The categories of
expenditures may be merged into broader categories in the financing agreement.

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
Loan Government LGUs

Beneficiary/
Proponent Total

Expenditure categories Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1.   Works 9.79 80.0 0.61 5.0 1.47 12.0 0.37 3.0 12.24 23.3

2.   Equipment and materials (for farms and
enterprise development)

8.17 30.0 0.68 2.5 1.50 5.5 16.88 62.0 27.23 51.8

3.   Equipment and materials (for value
chains)

1.87 55.0 0.34 10.0 0.51 15.0 0.68 20.0 3.40 6.5

4.   Consultancies 3.69 73.0 1.36 27.0 - - - - 5.05 9.6

5.   Training and workshops 1.32 71.7 0.52 28.3 1.85 3.5

6.   Equipment 0.17 35.0 0.32 65.0 - - - - 0.49 0.9

7.   Government support staff - - 0.80 100.0 - - - - 0.80 1.5

8.   Operation and maintenance - - 1.48 100.0 - - - - 1.48 2.8

Total 25.01 47.6 6.11 11.6 3.48 6.6 17.93 34.1 52.53 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. It is estimated that about 35,000 rural households will benefit directly from the

project, including 3,000 jobs to be generated by the project in the value added
subsector. Some 15,000 households, not counted elsewhere, will benefit from
improved rural roads, bringing the total to 50,000 beneficiary households. The
main incremental outputs following project investment in the target ARC clusters
will derive from the priority products selected by the feasibility studies. Likely
benefits at the farm level will stem from increased production and improved
productivity, enhanced value added at the farm level and higher prices as a result
of both quality improvements and more efficient marketing. Additional benefits will
be generated by the project’s capacity-building programme, e.g. strengthened
capacity to participate in value chain and rural enterprise development, and for
implementing agencies, capacity to target and manage poverty reduction and rural
development programmes in a gender-sensitive and participatory manner.

27. The financial and economic impact of the project has been assessed by:
(i) preparing detailed feasibility studies for the value chain investments that are
likely to be undertaken under the project; and (ii) analysing each model to
ascertain probable impact at the individual farmer level, in comparison with typical
without-project incomes. The project shows an economic internal rate of return
(EIRR) of 44.6 per cent and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.57 discounting benefits and
costs at 15 per cent. The sensitivity analysis demonstrates that the results are
robust. For example, the project would still be viable if all costs increased by
20 per cent and benefits 20 per cent lower. The economic and farm budget
analyses will be updated based on market demand and value chain analysis
undertaken in the first year.

D. Sustainability
28. The following elements are built into project design to help ensure that the

proposed investments and benefits are sustainable: (i) dedication of the first year
of implementation to the analysis, identification and planning of the project’s
investments in priority value chains involving famers, their organizations and the



EB 2015/115/R.13

8

private sector; (ii) the experience and lessons learned in the implementation of the
11 feasibility studies contribute to ensuring that subsequent investments are
sustainable; (iii) the project has a strong focus on involvement of the private sector
on a long-term basis to enhance the sustainability of investments and benefits;
(iv) it will support contractual and other types of arrangements linking smallholders
with the private sector to enable them to move up the supply chain and incorporate
greater value addition; (v) beneficiaries and LGUs will be involved in providing
counterpart funds for infrastructure facilities and will be responsible for their
operation and maintenance; (vi) project design takes into account the knowledge,
systems and practices of IPs, which will also help ensure the sustainability of
project interventions in areas where IPs are present; and (vii) 18 months before
the completion date, the CPMO will work closely with all stakeholders at national,
regional, provincial and municipal levels, and with ARCs and barangays, to finalize
an exit strategy and sustainability plan based on specific mechanisms to ensure
sustainability after the end of the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The first risk is that effective coordination among the three NCI agencies in the

field will be more difficult than at the national level. Project design counters this
risk as follows: (i) all agencies having a role in project implementation will be
members of the project steering committee to be able to resolve inter-agency
coordination issues; (ii) all implementing agencies will have an NCI focal point
through whom the project will interact with the NCI at the national level; (iii) the
three RMSCs will include representation of all relevant agencies to ensure effective
coordination of implementation in the regions and ARC clusters; and (iv) within
ARC clusters, CPOTs will include staff involved in day-to-day project
implementation. The second risk is the degree of willingness of the private sector
to be involved in implementation of component 2, which is essential for the success
of the project. This risk is addressed through: (i) component 1 and the
participatory analysis and planning process, which will involve all potential
participants, including representatives of private-sector agencies involved in the
particular value chains under analysis; and (ii) during the value chain analysis and
planning process, publication of the availability of grants for value chain
development to match investments from the private sector, the size of the grants
available, and the terms and conditions of the grants for diverse interventions. The
third risk is the weak capacity of poorer LGUs to provide the required counterpart
funds for rural infrastructure investment. The project counters this risk by reaching
an agreement with the Government on a financing plan for these investments
based on a financing ratio of 80 per cent for the IFAD loan, 5 per cent for national
government counterpart funds, 12 per cent on average for LGUs and 3 per cent for
beneficiary contributions.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

30. IFAD policies relevant to the project include: the IFAD Targeting Policy: Reaching
the Rural Poor; Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; Engagement with
Indigenous Peoples; IFAD Rural Enterprise Policy; IFAD’s Private-Sector
Development and Partnership Strategy; IFAD Climate Change Strategy; IFAD Rural
Finance Policy; and IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities
and Operations. Project design has reflected these policies and lessons learned in
the IFAD country programme. The project is classified as Category B and employs
the following mitigation measures: value chain development is resilient to climate
change, environmentally friendly and sustainable; training includes management
and adaptation to the threats of climate change and environmental awareness;
environmentally friendly and sustainable production systems will be promoted (e.g.
use of the farming systems approach, good agricultural practices and varieties that
can tolerate climate variability); and DENR and its local offices will be involved to
ensure that value chain development is in line with good practices for



EB 2015/115/R.13

9

environmental and natural resource management.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
31. The project objective is aligned with the PDP’s goal of a competitive and

sustainable agriculture and fisheries sector. The project will complement other
donors working in the same sector – such as the Asian Development Bank, Japan
International Cooperation Agency and World Bank – to increase project impact in
poverty reduction and on policy dialogue with the government and other
stakeholders. IFAD will also work with government programmes for an improved
policy environment and governance. The project will explore diverse types of
partnership arrangements between project beneficiaries and the private sector,
ensuring that such arrangements are fair to farmers and ARC communities.
Private-sector organizations and business development partners can take a leading
role as innovators in improving the returns from existing and emerging value
chains in an enterprise-oriented development approach.

Innovations and scaling upC.
32. The project will be the first foreign-assisted project under DAR to support the NCI.

Its investment is quite small when compared with the growth needed to make a
serious dent in rural poverty in Mindanao. However, the project could catalyse
improved household incomes and attract further investment for scaling up – in
order to fully realize the potential benefits of Mindanao’s comparative advantage in
key agricultural commodities.

Policy engagementD.
33. The project will finance policy/case studies – for policy dialogue and consultation

with relevant national and local institutions and with other stakeholders – on
planning and implementation of the value chain approach to agro-enterprise
development, mechanisms for convergence and other relevant studies. The studies
envisaged could include: (i) consolidation of smallholder production to achieve
economies of scale in production and marketing, appropriate business models, and
contractual and legal arrangements; and (ii) innovative engagement of the private
sector in providing rural infrastructure to support value chain development.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A financing agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
appendix.

35. The Republic of the Philippines is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of the Philippines in an amount equivalent to twenty-two million
eight hundred thousand euros (EUR 22,800,000), equivalent to approximately
US$25.01 million and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's Report

Proposed loan to the Republic of the
Philippines for the Fisheries, Coastal
Resources and Livelihood Project (FishCORAL)


Republic of the Philippines

Fisheries, Coastal Resources and Livelihood Project
(FishCORAL)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of the Philippines

Executing agency: Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources,
Department of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$43.05 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 27.31 million (equivalent to approximately
US$29.96 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 15-18 years, including a
grace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.76 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.33 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.12

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Philippines for the Fisheries, Coastal Resources and
Livelihood Project (FishCORAL), as contained in paragraph 34.

Proposed loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the
Fisheries, Coastal Resources and Livelihood Project
(FishCORAL)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Philippines is a middle-income country, and in 2013 the GDP reached an annual

growth rate of 7.2 per cent. However, the recent increase in GDP has not translated
into a reduction of the incidence of poverty, indeed there has been little change
from 2009 to 2012; 22.9 per cent (2009) and 22.3 per cent (2012) of families in
those two years were living below the poverty line. The failure to reduce poverty
during the previous decade reflects underinvestment, slow growth of per capita
incomes, a high population growth rate, high dependency rates, inequitable
distribution of income, natural disasters and inflationary pressures, mainly from
rising fuel and food prices. Nationally, income inequality remains high, with a Gini
coefficient of 0.44. Despite the recent lack of progress in reducing the incidence of
poverty, the Philippines Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016 envisages that the
country could still achieve the Millennium Development Goal poverty reduction
targets by 2015. In 2011, the Human Development Index for the Philippines was
0.644, ranking 112th among 187 countries. The country’s Gender Inequality Index
improved to 0.427 in 2011, ranking 75th in the world.

2. Fishers were among the poorest groups in the country, with a poverty incidence of
41.4 per cent in 2009, higher than the 35 per cent in 2003. Municipal fishers1 and
their families remained poor due to: (i) low coastal productivity owing to habitat
and watershed degradation; (ii) fish stock depletion due to illegal fishing practices,
pollution and overfishing; (iii) lack of access to basic services and institutional
support; (iv) high population density in coastal areas; (v) poor post-harvest
handling and distribution systems; (vi) lack of alternative income-generating
activities; and (vii) weak political will on the part of local leaders to enact and/or
enforce fishery laws.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The rationale for investing in the fisheries sector is that: (i) fishers, especially
municipal fishers, are among the poorest groups in the country; and (ii) the
fisheries sector is very important to the fishing communities as it is the source of
their livelihoods and a major source of dietary protein for the population as a
whole, and the main source of foreign exchange earnings for the national economy.
The project includes investments and activities to address the key issues that have
impoverished many fishing communities, such as coastal habitat degradation, use
of illegal fishing practices, overfishing, lack of enforcement of fishery ordinances,
pollution and a lack of viable livelihood activities alternative to fish capture. It will
adopt the ecosystem approach to fisheries and coastal resource management, and
a bay-wide approach to enabling the municipalities and fishing communities to

1 Those who fish within 15 km of the shoreline, 12 km in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.



EB 2015/115/R.12

2

improve the productivity and sustainable management of their fishery and coastal
resources. The project will link the livelihood enterprises it supports to the market
economy to help ensure their sustainability. It will assist the Bureau of Fisheries
and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) in improving its institutional capacity to support the
fisheries and coastal resources sector. The project is in line with the priorities
defined in the PDP 2011-2016 for the fisheries sector in the areas of inclusive
growth, poverty reduction, improving the economic status of poor coastal
communities, building the capacity of communities and local administrations to
better manage their coastal resources, improving the productivity of inshore
waters, exploring the export potential of fisheries, improving food security and
nutrition, and overall GDP growth. It also contributes to attainment of the goals and
targets of existing sectoral plans, such as the Agrikulturang Pilipino (AgriPinoy), the
Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Programme (AFMP) and the Fisheries Road
Map. Investment in livelihood development supports the Agribusiness Road Maps
for the fisheries sector and the regional development plans.

4. The project is complementary to and supportive of the Government’s
Reconstruction Assistance to Haiyan and the Department of Agriculture’s
rehabilitation plan for the agriculture sector. These initiatives will help rebuild
fishing communities and rehabilitate coastal resources affected by Typhoon Haiyan
in the Eastern Visayas Region, through rehabilitation of the coastal and fishery
resources and recovery of the livelihoods of fishing communities – contributing to
increasing community resilience to natural disaster and climate change risks. The
project is consistent with the strategic objectives of the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2010-2016 in: (i) improving fisheries and
coastal resource management and the livelihoods of poor coastal communities; and
(ii) managing natural resources within the context of climate change, gender
mainstreaming, policy dialogue and support for decentralization.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will target 11 bays/gulfs from Regions 5, 8 and 13 in Luzon and

Visayas, and the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). The targeted
bays are located in 14 provinces, with 103 municipalities or cities bordering the
bays/gulfs and 1,098 coastal villages/barangays. Approximately 724,000 poor
people or 188,000 households live in these coastal villages, of which 90,596 are
fishing households with an estimated 38,050 of them living below the poverty line,
including households headed by women and/or out-of-school youth. The main
criteria for selection of project beneficiaries will be based on the socio-economic
conditions of fishing households, using up-to-date lists of poor households from the
Department of Social Welfare and Development. The project will identify potential
beneficiaries by targeting existing, eligible registered people’s organizations (POs)
and their fishing community members. Members of the target group will include
memberships of the POs, either self-selected or based on their interest in the
proposed livelihood enterprise(s) or through participatory wealth ranking. The
project will also establish new POs in response to demand from the target group.

B. Project development objective
6. The overall goal of the project is to contribute to reduction of poverty in the target

coastal communities of the targeted bays/ecosystems by 5 per cent from the mean
poverty incidence of 42 per cent. The development objective is to realize (a) annual
income of participating fishing community households increase by 10 per cent from
baseline; and (b) employment of women engaged in income generating activities
increased to 40 per cent from the baseline of 20 per cent.



EB 2015/115/R.12

3

C. Components/outcomes
7. The project has three components: (i) coastal resource management; (ii) livelihood

development; and (iii) project management and coordination. The expected
outcomes for components 1 and 2 are: component 1: fishing communities adopt
sustainable management of fishery and coastal resources that increase overall
stocks; and component 2: fishing households in the target coastal communities
constantly engaged in diversified sources of income.

8. Component 1 will:

(a) Assess governance and legislation by the bay management councils (BMCs),
and facilitation of the formation, reactivation and management of the
operations of the BMCs, including the adoption of bay-wide fisheries
ordinances. The project will encourage the creation of integrated fisheries and
aquatic resource management councils (IFARMCs) where no such organization
exists, and will support their operation and that of the existing IFARMCs,
including capacity-building. It will also facilitate the participation of local
fishing communities in the management of municipal fisheries and coastal
resources, together with local government units (LGUs), by incorporating pre-
existing fisheries management systems. It will assist LGUs in introducing
and/or completing registration of municipal fishers, their motorized and non-
motorized fishing vessels and gear and the introduction of a municipal
licensing system for fishers, fishing vessels and gear, as well as collection of
associated licensing revenues and their use to support enforcement of
fisheries ordinances.

(b) Help control overfishing caused by illegal fishing and high population density
along the coastline and will support law enforcement and regulatory activities
of LGUs to manage fishing efforts and provide alternative marine and land-
based livelihood opportunities to contribute to a reduction in overfishing. It
will address the lack of landing, catch and effort statistics by having fishing
households record data to enable BFAR to propose policy measures to
appropriately address overfishing based on reliable and timely information.
The project will support a review of existing relevant legislation, including
municipal fishery ordinances, in consideration of the proposed changes in the
Fisheries Code.

(c) Reinforce fishery law enforcement teams (FLET) at village or community and
LGU levels. BFAR will organize and strengthen law enforcement teams
composed of coast guard and police personnel to apprehend violators. The
project will assess the types and social and economic characteristics of illegal
fishing, propose ways to address this complex issue, and provide equipment
and training as required. The project will assist LGUs in improving
coordination functions with BFAR and other relevant agencies; the fisheries
database and reporting system; and revenue generation from registration
fees, fines, and fees for resource use, etc. These steps will help institutionalize
the arrangements for funding law enforcement activities and fisheries coastal
resources management.

(d) Update coastal resource management plans through a participatory process
involving local communities, people’s and private-sector organizations and
local governments. They will become coastal resource management and
investment plans and will be part of a comprehensive land and water use plan
and of the municipal development plans of LGUs. All subprojects proposed for
financing and included in the municipal development plans will reflect the
need to address the expected impacts of climate change and to reduce the
risks of natural disasters. Assistance will be provided to help LGUs settle
disputes on municipal boundaries to establish clear municipal waters
delineation.



EB 2015/115/R.12

4

(e) Manage mangroves, sea grasses, coral reefs and beaches using an ecosystem
approach. New and existing fish sanctuaries and other types of protected
areas will be established and managed. The project will help protect, enhance
and rehabilitate resources, e.g. stock enhancement in protected areas using
juvenile and adult fish from hatcheries.

(f) Support coastal resource management – the project will finance the
infrastructure and equipment required, including delineation markers for
identified fish sanctuaries within targeted bays. LGUs will be fully responsible
for the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure and equipment
provided by the project – during and after the implementation period – with
the support of IFARMCs.

9. Component 2 will:

(a) Support/reactivate suitable existing POs and form new groups/POs as needed,
giving particular attention to the participation of women. Key elements of the
training modules will be group organization and management, basic
entrepreneurship, business management, value chain concepts and
approaches, coastal resource management and gender mainstreaming.

(b) Promote environmentally friendly livelihood enterprises identified in the
approved coastal resource management plans, for example fisheries-related
enterprises, sustainable tourism and other appropriate enterprises. There will
be no project support for increasing fishing activities or for provision of fishing
gear. Mitigation measures for identified feasible livelihood enterprises will be
put in place to prevent further environmental degradation, waste generation
and overexploitation of resources. Project-financed inputs for livelihood
enterprises will be provided as a package, combined with the provision of
training for the members of POs, including both technical skills and the
business development aspects of operating livelihood enterprises. Subsequent
cycles will be financed from the income earned, while successful enterprises
can access microfinance institutions or NGO sources to finance future
expansion.

(c) Finance the following: infrastructure facilities to support seaweed production;
access improvements, connecting coastal communities to the nearest all-
weather road for transport of marine products; improvements of selected
BFAR hatcheries; and, where needed and justified, construction of fish-landing
facilities; provision of mini ice plants with cold-storage facilities, smoke
houses, store houses and dryers. It will also assist in the identification of
potential private investors and the preparation of feasibility studies. POs will
be fully responsible for the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure
and equipment provided by the project – during and after the implementation
period.

10. Component 3 will assist BFAR in implementing its reorganization plan in the four
regions and will finance the project management and coordination structures and
associated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanisms at national, regional, bay-
wide and city/municipality levels.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The key elements of the project’s implementation approach include: (i) use of the

ecosystem approach for fisheries management; (ii) financing of activities identified
by coastal communities and municipal/city authorities and included in the LGU
development/investment plans; (iii) implementation arrangements that will follow
the Government’s procedures and mandate at all levels and will operate within the
government framework for decentralization and as part of the National



EB 2015/115/R.12

5

Convergence Initiative; and (iv) consultation with the National Commission on
Indigenous Peoples, if indigenous peoples (IPs) are found to live in any of the
target coastal communities – following the approach and procedures for engaging
IPs in development. The phasing of project implementation will be based on the
readiness of POs, LGUs, BMCs and regional agencies. The livelihood development
subprojects will be aligned with the priority commodities identified by the BFAR
Regional Roadmaps to ensure their suitability for the target locations and thus
contribute to their sustainability.

B. Organizational framework
12. BFAR will be the project’s lead implementing agency, with full responsibility for

project administration and management, and will use its existing structures at
national, regional, and provincial levels to implement project activities. The
municipalities and cities are responsible for managing municipal waters and coastal
zones. A high-level inter-agency project steering committee (PSC) at the national
level will provide policy guidance; approve project implementation guidelines,
annual workplan and budgets (AWP/Bs) and procurement plans; and resolve
implementation issues that cannot be decided at the regional level. A regional
coordination and steering committee (RCSC) will serve as the policy and
institutional advisory committee for project implementation at that level, and will
facilitate effective and efficient delivery of various agencies’ services in support of
the project. A bay coordination and support committee will coordinate project
activities within each bay. A project support and coordination office (PSCO) at BFAR
central office will be responsible for supporting, coordinating and monitoring project
implementation, coordinating within BFAR and with government oversight agencies,
LGUs, project management teams at regional, municipal and bay/gulf levels, and
IFAD. Regional project management offices (RPMOs) will be established in each
target region. Municipal/city project management offices (M/CPMOs) will be based
at the municipal or city LGU in Regions 5, 8 and 13, while in ARMM a municipal
project implementing unit (MPIU) will be based at the BFAR Provincial Fisheries
Office under the leadership of the provincial fisheries officer. The project will
operate as part of the National Convergence Initiative, with assistance from other
government agencies as needed.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. Planning. AWP/Bs will be prepared through a participatory process, starting at the
community level and involving representatives of POs, the CPMO/MPMO/MPIU and
the bay/gulf alliance. RPMOs will consolidate the provincial AWP/Bs into a regional
document. PSCO will consolidate the regional AWP/Bs into a national AWP/B for
IFAD review and subsequent PSC approval.

14. Monitoring and evaluation. Project M&E will be in accordance with the
Government’s harmonized, national Results-based Performance Management
System and IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS). It will report
on project implementation status and progress in terms of outputs, outcomes and
impact. The RCSC and RPMO will provide regular reporting on accomplishments
regarding policy and major operational issues to regional development councils,
LGUs and other stakeholders. The project will conduct baseline and completion
impact studies. A rapid participatory resource and socio-economic assessment will
be conducted in each bay at project start-up and completion.

15. Learning and knowledge management. The project will generate and manage
knowledge in order to: improve implementation; contribute to BFAR’s body of
knowledge; aid in raising awareness of stakeholders; and enhance future policy
development and project/programme implementation. It will support innovative
approaches, document lessons learned and organize knowledge-sharing among
project staff, BFAR and other implementing agencies. It will also share knowledge



EB 2015/115/R.12

6

with other IFAD-assisted projects across the country and the region.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management. BFAR, through the PSCO, will be responsible for overall

financial management of the project, including AWP/Bs, procurement, flow of funds,
disbursements, internal control, accounting, financial reporting and audit. The
project will follow the government’s financial systems, rules and regulations under
the New Government Accounting System, consistent with IFAD’s standard
disbursement procedures, for receipts and disbursements of proceeds from the
IFAD loan and government counterpart funds. RPMOs will be responsible for
management of funds at the regional level. BFAR will execute a memorandum of
agreement with each LGU and other implementing agencies at national, regional,
provincial and municipal levels to detail responsibilities, required services and their
financing. In order to reduce fiduciary risks arising from insufficient experience and
capacity, the financial management capability of the central and regional offices of
BFAR and of LGUs will need to be strengthened through staff training and close
supervision.

17. Flow of funds. The Department of Finance, through the Bureau of the Treasury,
will open a designated account in United States dollars, in the central bank or
another bank acceptable to IFAD, exclusively for the loan. Project accounts in the
Philippine peso will be opened at central and regional levels.

18. Procurement. BFAR will undertake major procurement packages in line with the
annual procurement plans through the PSCO and RPMOs supported by their
respective BAC and Finance and Administrative Services Division. Procurement will
follow the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Government Procurement
Reform Act (RA 9184) to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s Project
Procurement Guidelines. Smaller items, as defined in the procurement plans, will be
procured by regional offices.

19. Audit. Project consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by the
Commission on Audit in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits. The
annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each
fiscal year.

20. Governance. IFAD will apply a policy of zero-tolerance in respect of fraudulent,
corrupt, collusive or coercive action.

E. Supervision
21. IFAD and the National Economic Development Authority will jointly conduct annual

supervision and implementation support missions, and IFAD will conduct a post-
supervision mission 6-9 months later, depending on the project’s progress.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
22. Total project costs are estimated at US$43.05 million over a five-year

implementation period, as shown in table 1. This includes taxes and duties
estimated at US$3.72 million or 8.8 per cent of total costs, which will be covered by
the Government’s contribution. Base costs were estimated at 2013 prices, with
price contingencies of 3 per cent per annum for pesos and dollars, and physical
contingencies of 3.5 per cent of base cost for all expenditures except staff costs.
Physical contingencies amount to US$1.14 million and price contingencies to
US$1.43 million, yielding total contingencies of US$2.57 million (6 per cent of total
baseline costs). The estimated average cost per target beneficiary household is
US$274 per household.



EB 2015/115/R.12

7

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan Government LGUs
Beneficiary/
proponent Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Coastal resources

management 18 751.2 77.7 2 537.4 10.5 2 725.8 11.3 128.3 0.5 24 142.6 56.1
2. Livelihood

development 10 988.2 72.7 1 721.1 11.4 1 199.8 7.9 1 199.8 7.9 15 109.0 35.1
3. Project management

and coordination 216.4 5.7 1 866.1 49.2 1 710.5 45.1 - - 3 793.0 8.8
Total project costs 29 955.7 69.6 6 124.6 14.2 5 636.1 13.1 1 328.1 3.1 43 044.6 100.0

B. Project financing
23. Project financing comprises: (i) an IFAD loan of US$29.96 million (69.6 per cent);

and (ii) a Government contribution of US$11.76 million (27.3 per cent), consisting
of the national government counterpart contribution of US$6.12 million
(14.2 per cent) and LGU financing of US$5.64 million (13.1 per cent); and
(iii) contributions in cash or in kind from proponents and beneficiaries of about
US$1.33 million (3.1 per cent).

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan Government LGUs
Beneficiary/

proponent Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 1 726.8 80.3 230.4 10.7 193.4 9.0 - - 2 150.6 5.0
2. Equipment,

materials, and
supplies 17 734.0 76.4 2 486.1 10.7 1 735.9 7.5 1 247.4 5.4 23 203.4 53.9

3. Consultancies 10 494.9 89.5 1 071.2 9.1 80.8 0.7 80.8 0.7 11 727.7 27.2

4. Government staff - - 367.1 16.1 1 915.5 83.9 - - 2 282.6 5.3
5. Operation and

maintenance - - 1 969.8 53.5 1 710.5 46.5 - - 3 680.3 8.5
Total project costs 29 955.7 69.6 6 124.6 14.2 5 636.1 13.1 1 328.1 3.1 43 044.6 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
24. About 724,000 poor people or 188,000 households living in the 1,098 coastal

villages in the 11 targeted bays/gulfs will benefit directly from the project, of which
about 90,596 are fishing households, with an estimated 38,050 (146,495 people)
living below the poverty line. Project interventions are expected to improve the
productivity of municipal waters and coastal zones and generate livelihood benefits
for the members of coastal communities. Project benefits are expected to be
generated through: (i) effective law enforcement and regulatory activities with
respect to municipal fisheries; (ii) improved protection and management of coral
reef, mangrove, sea-grass ecosystems and other coastal resources; and
(iii) implementation of sustainable community-based livelihood enterprises.

D. Sustainability
25. To help ensure sustainability, the following are included in project design:

(i) assisting LGUs in developing sustainable sources of local revenues to finance
FLETs and provide funds for investment in the management of municipal fisheries
and coastal resources; (ii) ensuring the participation of POs and their members in
identifying and planning proposed livelihood activities; (iii) involving the private
sector on a long-term basis to enhance sustainability of the investments in



EB 2015/115/R.12

8

alternative sources of livelihoods for members of coastal communities and their
organizations; (iv) requiring beneficiaries, municipalities and cities to share in the
costs of the project’s investments; and (v) after the midterm review, preparing an
exit strategy and sustainability plan.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
26. The current lack of technical and management capacity within BFAR is a risk. It is

addressed by the inclusion of sufficient contract staff to manage the project
together with the assigned staff of BFAR. The project will support BFAR’s
reorganization plan through provision of the capacity development needed to
improve the technical capacities of BFAR’s offices in the target regions. A second
risk is unsustainability of project activities after the project ends, thereby repeating
the experience of many previous project interventions in various bays/gulfs. The
project design tackles this issue by focusing on the generation of sustainable
sources of local revenues to finance the necessary law enforcement activities and
investment in resource management. Another risk is that agencies concerned may
be unable to provide the coordinated approach needed at the local level. The design
counters this risk through the use of memorandums of agreement between BFAR
and all agencies engaged in project implementation to specify roles and
responsibilities, costs and sources of finance. It also includes all agencies with a
role in project implementation as members of the regional coordination and
steering committees; and indicates that all implementing agencies will have a
FishCORAL focal point at the national level. An associated risk concerns the
willingness of the private sector to be involved in supporting the development of
alternative livelihood enterprises for the members of fishing communities. This is
addressed by involving the private sector from the initial planning stages through to
the processing and/or marketing of the products, and by the availability of some
initial project finance for livelihood development production activities to match
investments from the private sector for processing, drying and marketing.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
27. The project design is consistent with the third strategic objective of the COSOP2 and

aligns well with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, which focuses on:
secure access to natural resources; climate change adaptation and mitigation;
improved agricultural technologies and effective production services; more
comprehensive financial services; integration into value chains through competitive
agricultural input and produce markets; rural enterprise development and off-farm
employment opportunities; technical and vocational education and training; and
empowerment of rural poor people through effective and sustainable rural
producers’ organizations. In this context, agriculture includes fisheries. Under the
Philippine Environmental Impact Statement System, the project is classified both as
Category C and Category D, as it is intended to directly enhance the quality of the
environment or address existing environmental problems in coastal areas; and the
rural infrastructure components are small-scale and do not fall under other
categories.

B. Alignment and harmonization
28. The project objective is aligned with the PDP’s goal of a competitive and sustainable

agriculture and fisheries sector. It will complement and coordinate with existing and
planned projects of the Department of Agriculture and others (e.g. the Philippines
Rural Development Project (World Bank), Integrated Environment and Natural
Resource Management Project (AsDB/IFAD) and Ecosystems Improved for

2 “Selected marginalized and poor communities dependent on coastal resources in Bicol, eastern Visayas, northern
Mindanao and ARMM have sustainable access to fisheries and other productive coastal resources, use sustainable
management practices and diversify livelihood opportunities to meet their basic needs (in particular, food).”



EB 2015/115/R.12

9

Sustainable Fisheries (ECOFISH – USAID). IFAD will also work with government
programmes for an improved policy environment and governance. The project will
explore diverse types of partnership arrangements between project beneficiaries
and the private sector. Private-sector organizations and business development
partners will take a leading role as service providers in improving the returns from
livelihood enterprises.

C. Innovations and scaling up
29. Despite the relatively small investment in relation to the scale of the issues

involved, the project could be a catalyst for improving household incomes and
attracting further investment in scaling up. This in turn could realize the potential
benefits from good, sustainable management of city/municipal fisheries and other
coastal resources. A key innovation for scaling up will be the sustainable financing
systems to be developed and introduced at the municipal level to: (i) effectively
enforce the fisheries ordinances for municipal fisheries and coastal resources; and
(ii) improve conservation and management of fisheries and coastal resources by
local governments and fishing communities.

D. Policy engagement
30. The project will support policy/case studies for policy dialogue and consultation with

the relevant national and local institutions. Such communication will concern the
management by LGUs of municipal/city fisheries and coastal resources and
development of alternative livelihood enterprises for coastal communities. The
project will provide support in reviewing existing relevant legislation, covering the
parts of the Local Government Code related to: municipal fisheries; the Coastal
Zone and Fisheries Code of the Philippines; possible duplication between the roles
and responsibilities of the BMCs and IFARMCs; and the future management role of
pre-existing fisheries management systems. The project will also provide support to
review other relevant legislation such as the Agriculture and Fisheries Management
Act. After the midterm review, it would pilot proposed changes to the codes with
respect to municipal fisheries in selected locations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
31. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

32. The Republic of the Philippines is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

33. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
34. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of the Philippines in an amount equivalent to twenty-seven million
three hundred and ten thousand euros (EUR 27,310,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$29.96 million), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka for the
Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization
Project

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Executing agency: Ministry of Plantation Industries

Total project cost: US$65.4 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 18.45 million (equivalent to approximately
US$25.764 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend terms: Maturity period of 25 years, including agrace period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of
1.25 per cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Cofinancier(s): Bank of Ceylon and People’s Bank

Amount of cofinancing: US$3.25 million

Contribution of borrower: US$32.76 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.61 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for the Smallholder Tea and
Rubber Revitalization Project, as contained in paragraph 34.

Proposed loan to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka for the Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Sri Lankan economy has grown at an impressive pace in recent years,

recording an annual average growth rate of about 7.4 per cent in 2014. The
country is on track to meet most of the Millennium Development Goals and
compares favourably with other countries in its income band in terms of gender
equality. The Government’s development policy framework is articulated in the
Public Investment Strategy 2014-2016, which sets the principal targets as raising
the per capita income to US$4,000 in 2016 and elevating Sri Lanka to the level of a
strong middle-income country. The new Government, initially appointed in January
2015 and then reappointed in September 2015, has maintained these targets.

2. Eighty per cent of Sri Lanka’s population resides in rural areas, and agriculture
remains the backbone of the economy despite its declining share of GDP.
Smallholder farmers are major contributors to food security. The government’s
strategic direction for agriculture is to achieve a sustained improvement in
production through increased productivity and market competitiveness. Poverty is
primarily a rural phenomenon, and the main population groups living in poverty
are: (i) smallholders in crop and plantation production; (ii) plantation workers in
estate areas; (iii) artisanal and small-scale fishers; (iv) women-headed households;
and (v) unemployed and underemployed labourers.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. Rationale. The tea and rubber subsectors have been important contributors to the
national economy. Tea smallholders contribute 70 per cent of Sri Lanka's total tea
production while smallholder rubber growers make up 62 per cent of the land under
rubber cultivation. About 50 per cent of the smallholder tea lands are more than 20
years old with less than optimal production capacity. There is a dire need for
replanting, without which many of the smallholders will be pushed below the
poverty line. The Government has a subsidy scheme in place aiming to address
smallholders' difficulty in accessing appropriate financial products for tea replanting.
However, both the timeliness and level of financial support this government scheme
provides remain problematic, and additional financing is needed in order to
strengthen smallholders' participation in the replanting programme. The project will
complement the existing government scheme, and will make it more effective by
providing capital investment support to smallholders at the commencement of tea
replanting.

4. As part of the National Rubber Master Plan, the Government has been promoting
rubber in non-traditional rubber cultivation areas to provide a source of livelihood
for smallholders. This expansion is also a direct response to the demands of the



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

private sector, which has been calling for greater government support for rubber
production. The Government has introduced proactive policy that supports the
granting of land permits, land clearance and initial rubber cultivation. The project
serves to reinforce the Government's priority of rubber development in non-
traditional areas, focusing support on smallholder production.

5. Alignment with government priorities and the results-based country
strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP). The project is directly
aligned with the government’s development priorities as defined in the Public
Investment Strategy 2014-2016, particularly the policy directions for the tea and
rubber subsectors. It is consistent with the RB-COSOP for Sri Lanka (2015-2020)
and contributes directly to its two strategic objectives.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The project area will cover eight neighbouring districts in central and southern Sri

Lanka, including Galle (tea), Matara (tea), Ratnapura (tea and rubber processing),
Badulla (tea), Kandy (tea), Moneragala (rubber) and Ampara (rubber) and Nuwara
Eliya (tea). A total of 144,000 people, or 32,000 households, are expected to
benefit from the project.

7. The target group of tea interventions will be existing poor smallholder tea growers
having less than one hectare of unproductive tea lands. The target group of rubber
interventions will be smallholders having a holding of one hectare of rubber, to be
selected by poverty level. Gender equality will be one of the criteria used in the
selection of beneficiaries, to ensure that at least 30 per cent of the tea and rubber
growers are women.

B. Project development objective
8. The project goal is to enable poor rural people to improve their food security,

increase their incomes and strengthen their resilience. The development objective
is to ensure that smallholders' economic activities in tea and rubber become more
productive, profitable and resilient.

C. Components/outcomes
9. The project will have three components: (i) tea smallholder development;

(ii) rubber smallholder development; and (iii) inclusive rural financing, to be
supported by project management.

(i) Component 1: Tea smallholder development (approximately US$44.44
million; 69 per cent of total base cost), will promote better organization
among tea smallholders to enable them to effectively and sustainably produce
and market their products. It has three subcomponents: (a) strengthening tea
societies in production and marketing; (b) market-driven production support;
and (c) income and market diversification for tea smallholders.

(ii) Component 2: Rubber smallholder development (approximately
US$14.78 million; 22 per cent of total base cost), will enhance rubber
production and processing of quality rubber products with better market
linkages. It has three subcomponents: (a) strengthening rubber societies,
including processing and market sensitivity, (b) market-driven production
support, and (c) income and market diversification for rubber smallholders.

(iii) Component 3: Inclusive rural financing (approximately US$3.5 million;
6 per cent of the total base cost), will facilitate access by the targeted
smallholders to available bank financing for production, harvesting and
marketing of green tea leaves and rubber products. It has two
subcomponents: (a) facilitating access to lending from the banking system;
and (b) supporting implementation arrangements.



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

10. The main project outcomes include: (i) 200 revitalized tea societies and 100
strengthened rubber societies able to effectively provide a range of services to their
members; (ii) high-yield tea crops replanted on 5,500 hectares and rubber planted
on 3,000 hectares by smallholders to provide a sustainable source of income and
diversified livelihoods; and (iii) strengthened smallholders undertaking sustainable
commercial business with the private sector.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The project will adhere to the principles of demand-driven participatory

development to ensure that smallholders are the key decision-makers when they
participate in project activities. A value chain approach will be adopted in
identifying the relevant activities from production to processing and marketing.
Overall project implementation will take into account the following key factors: (i) a
large number of smallholders are the predominant producers of tea and rubber;
(ii) the private sector is keen to enhance tea and rubber production in order to
meet the growing market demand for these commodities, as well as to promote
sustainable and responsible farming; (iii) the formal banking sector is unable to
effectively provide the needed lending products due to their loan processing
procedures and risk aversion to rural lending; (iv) there is a need to strengthen the
capacity of government extension staff; there is also a need to put in place an
implementation strategy that is sustainable and does not lead to friction with
existing line agency staff; and (v) the cadre of village-level government staff can be
effectively employed for project implementation.

B. Organizational framework
12. The lead agency for the project will be the Ministry of Plantation Industries (MPI).

MPI will (i) appoint a senior staff member to supervise the overall implementation
of the project; (ii) set up a national steering committee to guide and steer project
implementation; and (iii) establish a project management unit (PMU) responsible
for daily project operations. The PMU will be headed by a project manager. District
level implementation will be the responsibility of the Tea Small Holdings
Development Authority (TSHDA) and the Rubber Development Department (RDD),
two of MPI's main constituent institutions. The district office of TSHDA, headed by
the TSHDA regional manager, and that of RDD headed by the RDD deputy director,
will act as the district project management cell (DPMC).

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. Planning. The project logframe will be the basis for preparing the annual work plan
and budget (AWP/B). The logframe will be refined periodically to reflect any
changes and adjustments that may be necessary during the life of the project. The
overall responsibility for AWP/B preparation will rest with the project manager, with
support from the TSHDA regional manager for tea and the RDD deputy director for
rubber at the district level. The district project AWP/Bs will be prepared by the
TSHDA regional manager or the RDD deputy director. The project manager will be
responsible for consolidating the district AWP/Bs into the overall project AWP/B, for
approval by the national steering committee and then no-objection by IFAD.

14. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The project will establish an effective and
efficient M&E system to provide comprehensive, frequent and reliable data and
information for sound result-based management and decision-making. The overall
responsibility for the project M&E activities will lie with the PMU, specifically its M&E
coordinator, who will be responsible for ensuring the consistency, accuracy and
timeliness of all project reporting. All M&E activities will be based on the IFAD
guidelines for project M&E and the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS)
first- and second-level indicators handbook. All indicators will be disaggregated by



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

gender and socio-economic status to allow for a proper assessment of poverty and
gender targeting.

15. Learning and knowledge management will be a key underlying theme. The
project is expected to offer valuable opportunities for learning at the policy,
operational and technical levels because it has certain novel features that can make
the existing government scheme for tea replanting and rubber expansion more
effective. In addition, the project can contribute to restructuring the manner in
which the group rubber processing centres are financed and operated as business
enterprises; demonstrating the use of eco-restoration to enhance tea yields;
promoting partnership with the private sector for better market linkages; and
enhancing the access to existing bank lending products for tea and rubber
production and other income-generating activities.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management. MPI as the lead project agency will be responsible for

overall financial management. The financial management arrangements will, to the
extent feasible, be mainstreamed into government systems. Operational day-to-day
fiduciary functions will be the responsibility of the PMU embedded within MPI, in
liaison with the DPMCs attached to district-level TSHDA and RDD offices. The PMU’s
financial management role will include consolidating AWP/Bs, managing the flow of
funds, maintaining project bank accounts, processing disbursement requests,
consolidating interim financial reports, and preparing annual financial statements
for audit. The PMU will put in place an imprest mechanism for the release of
adequate funds to DPMCs. It will also be responsible for ensuring that district-level
finance staff are provided with appropriate training and guidance with regard to
reporting expenditure and procurement. The financial management risk for the
project is rated medium. Measures to be put in place to mitigate this risk include
qualified and experienced financial staff, a detailed financial and accounting
manual, automated accounting processes (accounting software), quarterly financial
reporting, and internal and external audit.

17. Flow of funds. MPI will be responsible for managing the flow of funds from the
IFAD loan proceeds and the government counterpart funds, opening and
maintaining the designated account in United States dollars at the Central Bank of
Sri Lanka to receive initial deposit and replenishments, obtaining the agreed
counterpart funds from the General Treasury, forwarding imprest applications
prepared by the PMU to obtain advances from the designated account to meet
project requirements, and scrutinizing and forwarding withdrawal applications to
IFAD. MPI will make adequate annual budgetary provisions for both IFAD and
counterpart funds in the national budget, based on the project AWP/B.

18. Audit. The Auditor General, who is constitutionally mandated to audit all
government accounts and reports to Parliament annually, will perform the external
audit of the project. The Auditor General will submit audited financial statements
and a detailed audit report along with a management letter no later than six
months after the end of the financial year.

19. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services financed by the project
will be carried out in accordance with the national procurement guidelines to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD's project procurement guidelines. The
procurement methods to be applied in each case will depend on the expenditure
and the estimated value of the contract. The thresholds for the different
procurement methods will be detailed in the letter to the borrower.

20. Governance. In line with its anti-corruption policy, IFAD will apply zero tolerance in
respect of fraudulent, corrupt, collusive and coercive action.



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Supervision
21. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD which, with government

collaboration, will conduct annual supervision missions, regular implementation
support missions, a midterm review and a completion review.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
22. The total project cost is estimated at US$65.4 million including contingencies

(US$3.8 million) over a period of six years. Project costs are organized into: (i) tea
smallholders development (69 per cent of total base costs); (ii) rubber smallholders
development (22 per cent of total baseline costs); (iii) inclusive rural financing
(6 per cent of the base cost); and (iv) project management (4 per cent of total
baseline costs).
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Tea smallholder
development 16 380 36.9 - - 1 955 4.4 26 107 58.7 44 442 68.0

2. Rubber smallholder
development 7 635 51.6 15 0.1 1 654 11.2 5 480 37.1 14 783 22.6

3. Inclusive rural financing 50 1.4 3 251 92.8 - - 201 5.7 3 502 5.4

4. Project management 1 699 63.6 - - - - 974 36.4 2 674 4.1

Total 25 764 39.4 3 266 5 3 610 5.5 32 762 50.1 65 401

B. Project financing
23. IFAD will provide a loan equivalent to US$25.764 million on blend terms; the

Government will provide counterpart funds equivalent to US$32.76 million; the two
participating banks will provide an amount equivalent to US$3.25 million as a line
of credit from their own funds; and the beneficiaries’ contribution is estimated at
US$3.61 million.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries Borrower/Counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 4 491 60.5 - - 1 772 23.9 1 162 15.6 7 425
2. Vehicles 686 41.0 - - - - 987 59.0 1 674
3. Equipment and materials 3 985 72.0 - - 1 332 24.1 219 4.0 5 536
4. Consultancies 587 89.5 - - - - 69 10.5 656
5. Credit - - 3 000 100 - - - - 3 000
6. Goods, services and

inputs 2 028 75.1 - - 505 18.7 169 6.2 2 702
7. Capital grants and

government subsidy 9 624 27.0 - - - - 26 000 73.0 35 624
8. Training 1 294 67.3 251 13 - - 364 18.9 1 923
9. Salaries and allowances 1 645 41.0 - - - - 2 369 59 4 014
10. Operating costs 1 424 50.0 - - - - 1 424 50 2 847
Total 25 764 39.4 3 251 5 3 610 5.5 32 762 50.1 62 504

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
24. The project is expected to benefit a total of about 32,000 households and 144,000

people. Women-headed and poor households will be targeted in particular. The
project's support for tea replanting and intercropping will lead to increased yields



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

from tea as well as from appropriate inter-crops such as pepper. On average, a
household’s production benefits will increase from 3,000 kg/ha to over 14,000
kg/ha of fresh tea leaves in a year over a 20-year period, at a minimum.
Smallholders planting rubber will be able to benefit from a steady income from
latex, the average production of which is expected to be 2,160 kg per year for the
next 30 years. The project will contribute to institutional sustainability at the village
level by strengthening tea and rubber societies and linking them with private-sector
partners. The project's economic internal rate of return is estimated at 26 per cent.

D. Sustainability
25. There are strong elements in the project design that will enhance the sustainability

of benefits for smallholders. The most significant investment will be in the
replanting of tea and planting of rubber trees on new lands. The tea plantations are
expected to provide yields for another 20 to 25 years while the planting of rubber
trees is expected to provide benefits for 30 to 35 years. The quality of produce will
be ensured through the provision of high quality plants from nurseries certified by
the Tea Research Institute and the Rubber Research Institute. The marketing of tea
and rubber is not an issue in the country as there is high demand for both. Due to
the acute shortage of rubber, any additional rubber product can easily be
marketed. The ability of smallholders to convert latex into ribbed sheets will
enhance shelf life, and this in turn will make marketing easier. The increased
capacity of the smallholders to undertake intercropping and other small enterprises
through project support will enhance the sustainability of their livelihoods.
Smallholders' livelihoods will be further enhanced by increased incomes generated
from linkages with the private sector and implementation of the business models.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
26. The first risk is smallholder's lack of capital to invest in the replanting of old tea

crops and new rubber lands and also in processing equipment. This will be
addressed by providing capital support upfront to supplement government
financing. The second risk is the unavailability of plant materials, which can be
addressed by supporting private nurseries for tea and the large RDD nursery in the
Ampara district for rubber to provide the required plant materials. The third risk is
related to the timely regularization of land for the new rubber plantations. This is
currently being proactively addressed by MPI in collaboration with the Forest
Department and the Mahaweli Development Authority, both of which have agreed
to make the lands available immediately upon project start-up. The fourth risk is
farmer groups' low management and negotiating capacity, poor access to roads,
lack of transport and market information. These will be addressed through capacity-
building for tea and rubber societies and by supporting farm roads for enhanced
accessibility. Finally, the risk of climatic factors such as drought leading to lower
yields will be mitigated through the adoption of good agricultural practices,
including soil renovation and soil moisture management.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
27. The project is in line with IFAD policies, specifically: (i) the project target group has

been clearly defined and the selection of the project area is in keeping with IFAD's
targeting policy; (ii) in compliance with IFAD's gender policy, the project will make
special provision for the targeting of women, and gender disaggregated indicators
will be used to monitor women's participation; (iii) in line with IFAD's private sector
strategy, the project will place a strong emphasis on further developing and
strengthening the smallholders' linkages with licensed tea and rubber collectors and
processors; (iv) in keeping with the IFAD rural finance policy, the project will
facilitate access of smallholders to available financing for production, harvesting
and marketing of green tea leaves and rubber products; and (v) the design has
capitalized on the IFAD strategies and guidance tools for natural resource



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

management, climate change and environment, and has structured the project
activities in a way that will bring positive environmental impact and socio-economic
benefits to the communities.

B. Alignment and harmonization
28. The project is aligned with the Government’s development priorities for the tea and

rubber subsectors, and supports the implementation of the newly developed
National Rubber Master Plan. It will complement the ongoing government
programmes for smallholder tea replanting and rubber production. The project will
explore and support diverse types of partnerships between the project beneficiaries
and the private sector for enhanced access to market and financial services.

C. Innovations and scaling up
29. The project will vertically scale up to new geographic areas the successful

interventions in support of smallholder tea and rubber production initiated through
the IFAD-financed Smallholder Entrepreneurship Development Programme. It will
provide funding support for business models that link smallholders with the private
sector to ensure effective market access. The project will also partner with two
state banks to enhance smallholders' access to existing financial products specific
to tea and rubber.

D. Policy engagement
30. The project will facilitate the conduct of studies to assess the role and contribution

of the up-front capital grant in encouraging tea smallholders' participation in the tea
replanting scheme. The results of such studies will be used to initiate policy
dialogue with the Government on reviewing and possibly revising its subsidy
scheme to make it more effective for smallholders.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
31. A project financing agreement between the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
financing to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached
as appendix I.

32. The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka is empowered under its laws to
receive financing from IFAD.

33. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
34. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka in an amount equivalent to
eighteen million four hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 18,450,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kan and Cao Bằng


Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and
Cao Bằng

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Executing agencies: Provincial People’s Committees

Total project cost: US$74.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$42.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: maturity period of 25 years, including a graceperiod of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Contribution of borrower: US$20.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$10.7 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD


Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
the Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn
and Cao Bằng

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Since the introduction of comprehensive economic reforms known as Đổi Mới

(renovation) in 1986, Viet Nam’s economy has sustained strong economic growth.
Gross domestic product grew at an average of 7.2 per cent per annum over the
past 20 years, reducing poverty rapidly and lifting almost 30 million people out of
poverty since the 1990s. Viet Nam was classified as a lower-middle-income country
in 2009 and achieved five out of the eight Millennium Development Goals by 2010.
Under the higher poverty threshold issued by the Government’s Statistical Office in
2014, 17.2 per cent of the population are now considered to be living below the
poverty line. These achievements have been accompanied by structural shifts in
the economy. Between 1990 and 2012, the contribution of agriculture to GDP
decreased by more than 20 per cent, to 18 per cent in 2013. The proportion of the
labour force engaged in agriculture also decreased from more than 80 per cent in
the 1990s to an estimated 46.3 per cent in 2014.

2. Notwithstanding the economic transition under way towards industrialization,
agriculture continues to play an important role in maintaining Viet Nam’s economic
stability. The agricultural and rural sectors of the economy have, in recent years,
demonstrated solid annual growth of approximately 4.5 per cent due to
liberalization and private sector engagement. The development of the rural
economy, however, is still comparatively slow and not sustainable in many areas
due to inadequate linkages to markets, limited access to rural finance and
technology, and the impacts of climate change.

3. In rural areas, poverty remains a chronic problem, disproportionately affecting
ethnic-minority communities. It is concentrated in the upland areas of the
north-east and north-west, the central coastal region and parts of the central
highlands. While economic development has improved living standards in rural
areas, it has also contributed to income inequity and environmental degradation.
Despite the gains in per capita income in rural areas, tackling residual poverty is a
persistent challenge owing to limited assets, low levels of education and poor
health, particularly among ethnic minorities, who are disproportionately
over-represented among the rural poor.

4. Rural areas have less than half the average per capita income of urban areas but
almost thrice the poverty rate. Many rural households are not considered poor but
maintain an income level just above the poverty line. With little or no savings or
Government support and an almost-total dependence on natural resource
gathering and subsistence farming, they are vulnerable to unexpected life events,
climate shocks and the degradation of land and water resources. Approximately
90 per cent of each rural person’s total spending is to meet basic living costs. The
majority of their income is derived from agriculture, forestry or aquaculture
production and wages from mostly unskilled manual labour. The provinces of


Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng are among the poorest in Viet Nam, with 14.2 per cent of
households classified as poor and 9.4 per cent as near poor in Bắc Kạn, and
21.4 per cent classified as poor and 10 per cent as near poor in Cao Bằng.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng (CSSP) was
outlined during the development of the Viet Nam country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2012-2017 and included in the pipeline of projects that
received government approval. CSSP financing includes a loan of US$42.5 million
and a grant of US$0.5 million to scale up IFAD-supported approaches at the
national level through the National Target Programme for New Rural Development
(NTP-NRD) implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. A
rigorous process of consultation, analysis and participatory design involving
provincial authorities was undertaken from late 2014 to 2016 to identify change
issues and areas of intervention.

6. The CSSP is fully aligned with the Government’s Socio-economic Development
Strategy 2016-20 (SEDS), the NTP-NRD, National Target Project on Sustainable
Poverty Reduction and National Target Project to Respond to Climate Change. The
CSSP is designed in accordance with the strategic objectives of the current COSOP,
seeking to: (i) enable poor rural provinces to carry out market-led pro-poor rural
development; (ii) improve access among the rural poor, particularly women, to
commodity and labour markets; and (iii) enhance the capacity of poor rural
households to adapt to climate change. Agriculture accounts for more than
70 per cent of employment in the project provinces. Significant market demand
and opportunities for improved productivity and value addition exist in the forestry,
non-timber forest products, livestock, ginger, canna, fruit, cassava and peanut
subsectors in the two provinces. Opportunities also exist in ecotourism
development.

7. The CSSP builds on two IFAD-financed initiatives: Developing Business with the
Rural Poor Programme and the Pro-poor Partnership for Agroforestry Development
Project, which ended in 2013 and 2015, respectively. Both were rated “successful”
in the light of sharp reductions in household poverty levels, the adoption of
broad-based strategies to improve productivity, the mainstreaming of a
comprehensive decentralization and community-empowerment strategy
(Cao Bằng), infrastructure development supporting enhanced agricultural
production and market access, and strengthened agricultural value chains
(Bắc Kạn).

8. Based on this progress, the Provincial People’s Committees (PPCs) in the two
provinces identified further areas for poverty reduction efforts, including:
promoting market-oriented production focusing on high-value crops and animal
production; providing sustainable non-State rural financial services, especially for
women; strengthening linkages between enterprises and farmers through
agribusiness-promotion funds; and developing upland production systems with due
attention to natural resource management and climate change adaptation.

9. Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng still face many development constraints, including
inadequate capacity for market-oriented development and investment planning,
poor agribusiness and risk-management skills, lack of access to finance, and
inadequate rural infrastructure, in particular for upland economic activities. These
constraints are exacerbated by the effects of intense rainfall, producing floods and
soil erosion, and unseasonable drought, resulting in crop and livestock losses.

10. CSSP will scale up innovations developed by other IFAD-financed projects in
Viet Nam, with an emphasis on: (i) the expansion of private sector investment in
production and value addition in profitable commodity chains; (ii) the institutional



strengthening, training and capacity-building of existing agencies and local
authorities; (iii) the integration of participatory bottom-up planning, budgeting and
implementation; and (iv) broad-based reform as part of private
sector-development policy to ensure increased competitiveness and the expansion
of rural household incomes and asset-generating opportunities, particularly for poor
people. The Government through NTP-NRD is providing significant cofinancing for
CSSP, indicating a strong sense of commitment and ownership. The US$100 million
Asian Development Bank Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in North-eastern
Provinces Project, due to commence in 2017, is expected to complement CSSP
investments.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. Project area. The project will be implemented in the north-eastern provinces of

Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng in Viet Nam. Participatory process in both provinces
identified 70 communes based on poverty rates, vulnerability to natural disasters,
the commitment of local leadership and the potential to develop pro-poor value
chains.

12. Target population. The project target groups will comprise: (i) rural poor and
near-poor households with land and available labour, including household
enterprises; (ii) unskilled employed rural people; (iii) rural people who lack
productive land but have business acumen and desire; and (iv) farmers who have
the skills to promote commercial agricultural production. Women and
woman-headed and ethnic-minority households will be prioritized among this target
group.

B. Project development objective
13. The overall objective of the project is to contribute to sustainable poverty reduction

in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. The development objective is to sustainably improve the
income and reduce the climate vulnerability of poor and near-poor farm
households.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project comprises three main components and a project management

component:

 Component 1: Institutionalized provincial participatory planning. This
component aims to ensure that provincial socio-economic development
planning is legislated, holistic, participatory, climate-adapted and
market-oriented. It has three subcomponents that together underpin the
Market-Oriented Participatory Socio-economic Development Planning
(MOP-SEDP) process.

(i) Strategic investment plan. During the first year of the project, this
subcomponent will support provincial project coordination offices
(PPCOs), backed by international technical assistance, in conducting
financial and economic analysis of key commodity and associated value
chains in both provinces to be incorporated into provincial, district and
communal MOP-SEDPs.

(ii) Climate change-adaptation planning. This subcomponent,
spearheaded by the Provincial Ministries of Natural Resources,
Environment and Planning, will support: (a) the updating of provincial
climate change action plans; (b) awareness-raising of climate change
risks at the commune, district and provincial levels to improve
resilience; and (c) the building of capacities to integrate climate change
adaptation into the MOP-SEDP process.



(iii) Dissemination of climate-informed market-oriented
socio-economic development plans. This subcomponent will roll out
the climate-adapted MOP-SEDP through: (a) strengthened public sector
market economy skills; and (b) focused support to adapt the instrument
to scale. At the commune and district levels – initially in project target
districts and then throughout the two provinces – the project will
facilitate the integration of commodity-based value chain development
(subcomponent ) and climate change-adaptation plans
(subcomponent ii) through a participatory process. This process will
engage relevant entities at the village, commune and district levels and
include all public funding sources, including CSSP and NTP-NRD funds.
Women’s representation in MOP-SEDP planning will be prioritized.

 Component 2: A greener agricultural future. This component will support
the Government’s ambitious green growth agenda by promoting climate
change-adaption technologies that also provide mitigation benefits. It has two
subcomponents:

(i) Forest land and forest allocation. This subcomponent will support
the equitable ownership and efficient use of productive forest resources
in all Bắc Kạn target communes through certification, rehabilitation and
the issuing of forest land and use rights, directly contributing to carbon
sequestration. The project will facilitate the transfer of land and use
rights certificates for 17,000 hectares of forest land to poor households.
Certificates will be issued jointly to both wife and husband.

(ii) Common interest groups (CIGs) for climate adaptation. This
subcomponent will support the establishment or strengthening of
approximately 1,900 CIGs to implement profitable climate
change-adaptation technologies and practices within a value chain
framework, with co-benefits for climate change mitigation. In this
context, forage production will be integrated into farming systems, with
co-benefits for soil fertility and stability. A competitive grant programme
for CIGs whose membership comprises at least 40 per cent women will
support climate change-adaption technologies such as afforestation,
irrigation management, climate-resistant crop varieties,
system-of-rice-intensification rice, forage production, minimum tillage
and organic agriculture.

 Component 3: Profitable farms linked to finance and markets. This
third component aims to ensure increased public and private investment in
sustainable, profitable commodity production and value addition. It comprises
three subcomponents:

(i) Community infrastructure. Public infrastructure investment grants
will be available for investments by communes providing public benefits
essential to targeted commodity-chain development and/or climate
change or disaster preparedness. This activity will be integrated into the
NTP-NRD agriculture infrastructure investment process, which will be
funded by a government contribution. In this context, a vocational
training programme targeting young people will be supported with a
view to generating employment.

(ii) Rural financial services. Newly established Women’s Development
Funds (WDFs) in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng will be supported as an
effective means of improving financial inclusion in the rural communes
of the project area. This will include capacity-building for the WDFs, the
establishment of new women’s savings and credit groups, and seed
capital for lending operations. Support will also be provided to



transform WDFs into fully sustainable microfinance institutions (MFIs) at
project end in accordance with State Bank regulations.

(iii) Agribusiness Promotion Investment Fund (APIF). By establishing
such a fund, the project will provide cofinancing to catalyse
approximately 25 private sector agro-enterprise investments that
improve enterprise competitiveness and linkages to smallholder
farmers, thereby generating incremental markets for raw materials,
value addition and employment. Fund co-investments will be awarded
on a competitive basis, for equipment, transportation and marketing,
environmental management, staff training and technical advisory
services to farmers.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The CSSP will be implemented over the six-year period from 2017 to 2023. The

project will adopt similar implementation arrangements to those used successfully
in other IFAD projects but with a greater role played by the responsible provincial
departments, supported by the PPCOs. In addition, great emphasis will placed on
the decentralization of resources to districts and communes and on private sector
involvement.

B. Organizational framework
16. CSSP will be implemented through the PPCs of Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, which will

establish PPCOs to coordinate project implementation in their respective provinces
and steering committees to assist the PPCs in guiding government agencies, major
nationwide organizations, the private sector and communities at all levels to
achieve the project objectives. Inter-provincial PPCO meetings will be held twice
per year to foster cooperation in such areas as climate change-adaptation policy,
the identification of shared technical assistance, inter-provincial value chain
planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and learning and knowledge
management.

17. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will monitor
performance and assess the impact of activities. Monitoring will focus on
activities/inputs, outputs, outcomes, performance and risks, while evaluation will
assess the relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and impact on poverty reduction,
business growth, environment, empowerment, sustainability, lessons learned and
knowledge uptake. Both provinces have relevant M&E experience from previous
projects. The M&E system will cover the operational and financial aspects of the
project alike. The annual workplan and budget will be the key planning document
for the project and will be harmonized with the SEDP cycle.

18. Learning and knowledge management. This will comprise two approaches:
(i) knowledge management within the project will support learning among its
components; and (ii) support for a broader set of knowledge management
activities aimed at informing government decision-makers and influencing policy.
Regarding policy development, the experience of a single province, while
important, is unlikely to influence national policy relating to the MOP-SEDP or APIF.
However, the cumulative knowledge from relevant IFAD project experiences in
Viet Nam is substantial and will continue to grow. In this context, each PPCO will
produce an annual knowledge resource addressing the key areas of the IFAD
country programme – namely, private sector investment in upland areas, the
response of poor households to agricultural business opportunities, the
implementation of the MOP-SEDP process and the evolution of WDFs into MFIs – to
feed into national policy dialogue.



C. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The PPCOs will be responsible and accountable to the

Government of Viet Nam and IFAD for the proper use of funds, in line with the
respective legal agreements, subsidiary financing agreements for financial
institutions and contractual arrangements for service providers. The project
financial management arrangements will ensure that funds are used for the
intended purpose in an efficient and cost-effective manner through internal controls
and capacity-building at all levels. The existing computerized accounting system
will be used for bookkeeping and reporting. The accounting systems will provide
detailed financial statements of the operations, resources and expenditures related
to the project for each fiscal year, prepared in accordance with standards and
procedures acceptable to IFAD, and deliver such financial statements to IFAD in a
timely manner. The IFAD financial management assessment rated the fiduciary risk
as medium. However, both provinces have extensive experience in managing
externally financed projects, including IFAD-financed projects, with good outcomes
and accountability frameworks in general.

20. Flow of funds. IFAD will disburse funds in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the financing agreement. Project funds will flow from IFAD via three
designated accounts: two for loan funds and one for grant funds, the latter
operated by the Ministry of Finance in accordance with imprest fund arrangements.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
by IFAD will be carried out in compliance with IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines.
National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be applied to the
extent that they are consistent with the IFAD Guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems at the PPCO level
will be established. An external audit will be carried out, in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits, of
the consolidated financial statements of both provinces covering loan and grant
funds. Independent external auditors will be appointed in a timely way. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the six
months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. All major cofinancing allocations will be endorsed by the project
steering committee, approved by the PPC and, above certain thresholds, subject to
no objection from IFAD. Cofinancing at the commune level will be the result of an
open and equitable SEDP-based decision-making process that includes a
dispute-resolution mechanism. The IFAD Country Office capacity in project financial
monitoring was strengthened by the recruitment of an additional staff member in
mid-2013, improving the capacity for periodic oversight and support for PPCOs,
including spot checks and strong supervision of audit processes.

D. Supervision
24. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD through the country office in

accordance with the existing arrangements in Viet Nam.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$74.3 million. Indicative component costs

are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category and
financier are provided in table 2.


Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Province-based participatory planning
institutionalized 2,193.8 27.2 - - 5857.7 72.8 8,051.5

1.1 Strategic investment plan 108.0 77.0 - - 32.2 23 140.2
1.2 Climate change adaptation plan 944.6 75.9 - - 299.9 24.0 1,244.5
1.3 Climate-informed, market-
oriented socio-economic plans 1,141.2 17.1 - - 5525.7 82.8 6,666.8

2. A greener agricultural future 8,654.7 62.7 - - 3,557.3 25.8 1,582.8 11.4 13,794.9
2.1 Forest land and forest allocation 1,626.2 63.8 - - 232.3 9.1 691.1 27.1 2,549.7
2.2 CIGs for climate adaptation 7,028.5 62.5 - - 3,325.0 29.6 891.7 7.9 11,245.1

3. Profitable farms linked to finance and
markets 29,933.3 70.0 - - 7,183.7 16.8 5,670.2 13.3 42,787.2

3.1 Community infrastructure 21,330.8 69.2 - - 3,984.1 12.1 5.513.5 17.9 30,828.4
3.2 Rural financial services 4,557.8 96.7 - - - 156.6 3.3 4,714.4
3.3 Agriculture promotion
investment fund 4044.7 55.8 - - 3,199.6 44.2 - - 7,244.3

4. Programme management 7,718.3 18.7 - - - - 7,486.5 81.3 9,204.8
5. NTP-NRD National Coordination
Office Grant - - 500.0 100.0 - - - - 500.0

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2 27.8 74,338.3

B. Project financing
26. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of approximately US$42.5 million

(57.2 per cent of total project); (ii) an IFAD grant of approximately US$0.5 million
(0.7 per cent); (iii) a government contribution of approximately US$20.6 million
(27.8 per cent); and (iv) a beneficiary contribution of approximately
US$10.7 million (14.4 per cent). Reimbursement of eligible expenditures incurred
after approval but before entry into force will be permitted up to a limit of
US$300 000 for each province.

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Borrower/ counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 14.5 90.0 - - - - 1.6 10.0 16.2

2. Equipment and
materials

1,227.0 90.0 - - - - 136.3 10.0 1,363.3

3. Vehicles 94.2 50.0 - - - - 94.2 50.0 188.3

4. Consultancies 2,675.9 33.3 500.0 6.2 - - 4.862.0 60.5 8,041.5

5. Training 1,765.1 46.7 - - - - 2,015.9 53.3 3,781.0

6. Grants 32,969.6 66.2 - - 10,741.0 21.6 6.096.2 12.2 49,906.9

7. Credit 3,750.0 100.0 - - - - - - 3,750.0

5. Salaries and
allowances

- - - - - - 3,806.8 100.0 3,806.8

6. Operating costs - - - - - - 3,584.2 100.0 3,584.2

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2. 27.8 74,338.3


C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. The economic analysis determined CSSP to be robust, with an economic internal

rate of return (EIRR) of 14.8 per cent and a net present value discounted at nine
per cent of approximately US$27.0 million. An increase in project costs by
10 per cent would reduce the EIRR to 13.2 per cent, while a decrease in overall
project benefits by 20 per cent would result in an EIRR of 11.3 per cent.
Considering the possibility of a combination of a 20 per cent reduction in
incremental benefits with a two-year delay in benefits, the EIRR would be reduced
to 8.0 per cent. The switching values indicate that the project would remain
economically viable if benefits decreased by 31 per cent or project costs increased
by 46 per cent.

28. The main benefits from CSSP are: (i) increased crop, forest and livestock
productivity and production that is more resilient to the impacts of climate change
as well as improved access to better and more affordable inputs and their
application; (ii) increased proportion of farm produce successfully marketed;
(iii) reduced losses during production and processing; (iv) enhanced value addition
along value chains and improved product quality; (v) enhanced access to
longer-term financial services and cofinancing for productive investments;
(vi) increased employment; and (vii) increased government tax revenues.

29. The project is expected to provide significant direct benefits to at least 135,000
people or 30,000 poor or near-poor households, each expected to grow its assets
by at least 20 per cent. This will be achieved through a combination of
capacity-building, technology transfer and access to finance, supported by
upgraded community infrastructure and cofinancing of innovative investments in
their farming value chain operations.

D. Sustainability
30. The project is focused on enhancing private sector activity and competitiveness in

the specific subsectors targeted for investment. The most important determinant of
the sustainability of such investments, and thereby of their expected benefits, is
their continued profitability. The approach adopted will provide strong grounds for
the expectation that a large majority of investments will endure. The main tools to
enhance prospects for private business sustainability include: (i) enhanced capacity
of government staff, farmers and private rural enterprise actors to analyse and
prioritize investment choices; (ii) rigorous scrutiny of business proposals and
collaborating financial institutions; (iii) the commitment of a substantial proportion
of investment from the client’s own financial resources; (iv) complementary public
investment in infrastructure to improve business conditions and reduce costs; and
(v) a focused investment approach within the communes provided by the
MOP-SEDP process.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risk to the overall project objective relates to external macroeconomic

shocks. Such risks are ever present in a relatively open economy such as that of
Viet Nam, particularly when a high proportion of income is derived from export
revenue. At the national level, sound macroeconomic policies, including
market-determined exchange rates, are the main means to mitigate such risk. The
main mitigation measures at the project and enterprise levels are the emphasis on
sound project financial analysis, with emphasis on quality, high productivity and
low cost-per-unit output value. A major socio-economic risk relates to climatic
disaster. The project will advance the climate change-adaptation agenda and
ensure that all project-financed interventions are adapted to the changing climatic
conditions. The relatively weak private business environments in both provinces
pose a further significant risk. Both PPCs have agreed to work with CSSP to create
a more favourable business environment, including by benchmarking their
provincial performance against provinces with high competitiveness indices.


V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The CSSP takes into account key IFAD policies and strategies relating to targeting,

gender, land, ethnic peoples and climate change contributing to the overall
objectives of the current Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and in particular to:
(i) a natural resource and economic asset base for poor rural women and men that
is more resilient to climate change, environmental degradation and market
transformation; and (ii) access for poor rural women and men to services to reduce
poverty, raise income and build resilience in a changing environment. Most
activities related to environmental impact fall under category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. As noted above, the concept note for the CSSP was included in the COSOP project

pipeline and, as such, is aligned with the Government’s development priorities. The
programme underpins the NTP-NRD by supporting the development of market
options for the poor segments of the rural population, creating the necessary
change of mindset at the household level and building capacity to plan market
activities at the commune level.

C. Innovations and scaling up
34. The CSSP approach taken will consolidate and scale up the successes of past

interventions, within the strategic framework of the NTP-NRD, for which a
substantial increase in central government funding is anticipated. Innovations
related to climate-adapted and market-oriented participatory planning and poverty
reduction have been successfully piloted in various IFAD-supported projects in
Viet Nam, including in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. While the commitment of project
provinces to these approaches is significant – particularly for the roll-out of a
provincial MOP-SEDP process – a more rigorous and better market-oriented
approach is required for the effective stimulation and sustainable financing of
private sector investment in agricultural production and value addition along
profitable value chains. IFAD is supporting the roll-out of WDFs in 11 provinces,
with support for these activities under CCSP a part of this scaling-up effort.

D. Policy engagement
35. Along with the World Bank, IFAD has been requested by the Ministry of Agriculture

and Rural Development to assist in an assessment of NTP-NRD phase one and
provide recommendations for phase two, for which the National Assembly has
allocated approximately US$3 billion. The final recommended framework was
submitted to the Government mid-2016. This initiative, along with the grant under
CSSP, provides ample opportunity to scale up IFAD’s collective experiences and
approaches to the national level.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached.

37. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to forty two million
five hundred thousand US dollars (US$ 42.5 million), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to five hundred
thousand US dollars (US$0.5 million), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




































































(Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Additional Financing) 

between

MONGOLIA 

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED fC'

MON 39229



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated between MONGOLIA (“Borrower”) and 

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a grant agreement dated 24 October 2008 between the Borrower 
and ADB (“Grant Agreement”), ADB agreed to provide a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s 
Special Funds resources in an amount of fourteen million seven hundred twenty thousand 
Dollars ($14,720,000) for the purposes of the project described in Schedule 1 to the Grant 
Agreement (“Original Project”);

(B) by an agreement of even date herewith entered into between the 
Borrower and ADB (“Special Operations Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide the 
Borrower a loan from ADB’s Special Funds resources in various currencies equivalent to ten 
million seven hundred nineteen thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR10,719,000) for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to the Special Operations Loan Agreement;

(C) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to the Special Operations Loan Agreement; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of the Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations Applicable to LIBOR-Based Loans Made from ADB’s Ordinary Capital 
Resources, dated 1 July 2001 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this Loan 
Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject, 
however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 3.03 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Commitment Charge; Credit; Maturity Premium.
(a) The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge

on the unwithdrawn amount of the Loan at the rate and on the 
terms specified in the Loan Agreement.

(b) ADB shall provide to the Borrower a credit at 
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which credit shall



2 
 
 

 

remain fixed for the term of the Loan.  ADB shall apply the 
credit against the interest payable by the Borrower.   
 

(c) The Borrower shall pay a maturity premium at 
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which maturity 
premium shall remain fixed for the term of the Loan.  ADB 
shall add the maturity premium to the interest payable by the 
Borrower. 

 
(b) Section 3.06 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor: 
 
  Rebate. (a) Following any announcement by 

ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be 
reduced, ADB shall provide a Rebate to any Borrower with an 
outstanding Loan on which a higher Fixed Spread is 
applicable. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread 
applicable to the outstanding Loan and the Fixed Spread that 
will be applied to new Loans (expressed as a percentage per 
annum), by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on 
which the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods 
commencing on and after the effective date of the lower Fixed 
Spread that will be applied to new Loans. 

 
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its 

Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan 
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in 
ADB achieving savings, ADB shall provide a Rebate to the 
Borrower.  The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a 
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan 
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period 
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the 
Funding Cost Margin was calculated.  ADB shall apply the 
amount of the Rebate against the interest payable by the 
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after 
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was 
calculated. 

 
(c) Section 3.07 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor: 
 
  Surcharge. (a) Following any announcement by 

ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be 
increased, any Borrower with an outstanding Loan on which a 
lower Fixed Spread is applicable shall pay ADB a Surcharge. 
The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread that will 
be applied to new Loans and the Fixed Spread applicable to 
the outstanding Loan (expressed as a percentage per annum), 
by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on which 
the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods 



3 
 
 

 

commencing on and after the effective date of the higher Fixed 
Spread that will be applied to new Loans. 

 
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its 

Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan 
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in 
ADB incurring additional costs, the Borrower shall pay ADB a 
Surcharge.  The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined 
by multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a 
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan 
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period 
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the 
Funding Cost Margin was calculated.  ADB shall add the 
amount of the Surcharge to the interest payable by the 
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after 
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was 
calculated. 

    
  Section 1.02.  Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations, the Grant Agreement and the Special Operations 
Loan Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or 
the context otherwise requires.   
 
 
 

ARTICLE II 
 

The Loan 
 
 
  Section 2.01.   (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's 
ordinary capital resources an amount of thirty-five million dollars ($35,000,000) as such 
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.  
 

(b) The Borrower shall onlend a portion of the proceeds of the Loan to the 
Participating Banks for the purposes of Output 1(c) of the Project, under the Onlending 
Agreements, upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB. 
 

(c) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (d) hereinafter.  
 

(d) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (c) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 2.02.    The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of: 
 
 



4 
 
 

 

(a) LIBOR; 
 

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a 
credit of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations 
and; 

 
(c) a maturity premium of 0.10 as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan 

Regulations. 
 

  Section 2.03.   The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum.  Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts 
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement. 

    
  Section 2.04.   Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year. 
 
  Section 2.05.   The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to 
this Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 2.06.  (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of 
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt 
management: 
 

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency; 

 
(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any 

portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; 
and 

 
(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 

portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate. 

 
(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 

is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(6) of the 
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.  

 
 



5 
 
 

 

ARTICLE III 
 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan 
 

 
  Section 3.01.  The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Special Operations Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 3.02.   The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB. 
 
  Section 3.03.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 of the Special 
Operations Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has 
not been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between 
the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are satisfactory to 
ADB. 
 
  Section 3.04.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used 
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project. 
   

Section 3.05.   The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2021 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB. 

 
 
 

ARTICLE IV 
 

Particular Covenants 
 

 
  Section 4.01.   (a)   The Borrower shall cause the Project to be 
carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity with sound applicable 
technical, financial, business, and development practices. 
 
  (b) In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities, 
the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 5 
to the Special Operations Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 4.02.   The Borrower shall make available, promptly as needed 
and on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, the funds, facilities, services, land and other 
resources, as required, in addition to the proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the 
Project and for the operation and maintenance of the Project facilities. 
 
 



6 
 
 

 

  Section 4.03.  (a)  Whenever applicable, in the carrying out of the 
Project, the Borrower shall cause competent and qualified consultants and contractors, 
acceptable to ADB to be employed to an extent and upon terms and conditions satisfactory 
to the Borrower and ADB. 
 
  (b)  The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance 
with plans, design standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods 
acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, as applicable.  The Borrower shall furnish, or cause to 
be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards, 
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made 
therein, in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request. 
 
  Section 4.04.    The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its 
departments and agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative 
policies and procedures. 
 

Section 4.05.  (a)  The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate 
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) cause each Participating Bank to maintain the 
Special Account and other separate accounts and records for the Subloan(s); (iii) prepare 
annual financial statements for the Project in accordance with accounting principles 
acceptable to ADB; (iv) cause each Participating Bank to prepare and submit to the Borrower 
a statement of utilization of funds for the Subloan(s) in accordance with accounting principles 
acceptable to ADB; (v) have such financial statements, including the statement of utilization 
of funds for the Subloan(s) prepared by each Participating Bank, audited annually by 
independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing or the national equivalent 
acceptable to ADB; (vi) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report (which 
includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial statements, statements of utilization of funds, 
use of the Loan proceeds and compliance with the financial covenants of this Loan 
Agreement and the Onlending Agreements as well as on the use of the procedures for the 
imprest funds and statement of expenditures) and a management letter (which sets out the 
deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, 
if any); and (vii) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal 
year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in 
the English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit 
thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request. 
 

(b)   The Borrower shall cause each Participating Bank to (i) 
prepare its own entity-level annual financial statements in accordance with national accrual-
based financing reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (ii) have such financial statements 
audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of 
reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing or 
the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iii) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report (which includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial statements) and a 
management letter; and (iv) furnish to ADB through the Borrower, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request; 

 



7 
 
 

 

 
  (c)  ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements referred to in Section 
4.05(a) hereinabove within 30 days of the date of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s 
website. 
 

(d) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(v) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree. 
 
  (e)  The Borrower shall cause each Participating Bank to enable ADB, 
upon ADB's request, to discuss the entity-level annual financial statements and the 
Participating Bank’s financial affairs where they relate to the Subproject(s) with the auditors 
appointed pursuant to subsection (b)(ii) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any 
representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. 
This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an 
authorized officer of the Participating Bank, unless the Participating Bank shall otherwise 
agree. 
 
  Section 4.06.  The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents. 
 
  Section 4.07.  The Borrower shall ensure that any facilities relevant to 
the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with sound applicable 
technical, financial, business, development, operational and maintenance practices. 
 
 
 

ARTICLE V 
 

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity 
 
 
  Section 5.01.   The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01(l) of the Loan Regulations: 
 

(a) a party to an Onlending Agreement shall have failed to perform one or 
more of its obligations under an Onlending Agreement;  

 
(b) the Borrower shall have failed to perform one or more of its obligations 

under the Grant Agreement; and 
 
(c) the Borrower shall have failed to perform one or more of its obligations 

under the Special Operations Loan Agreement.  
 



8 
 
 

 

Section 5.02.   The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: any 
of the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.  
 
 
 

ARTICLE VI 
 

Effectiveness 
 

 
  Section 6.01.   A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of 
the Loan Regulations. 
 
 



10

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

MONGOLIA

By
BOLOR BAYARBAATAR

Minister
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Authorized Representative



 
 
 
 

 

11 

SCHEDULE 1 
 

Amortization Schedule 
 

(Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Additional Financing) 
 

 
1.  The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the 
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share).  If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the 
first Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on 
each Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total 
principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment 
Date; by (b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount 
to be adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this 
Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion applies. 
   
 
2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first  
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows: 
 

(a) To the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn and 
outstanding as of such date in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Schedule. 
 

(b) Any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such withdrawal in amounts 
determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the 
numerator of which shall be the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 
1 of this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment Share) and the 
denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining Original Installment Shares for 
Principal Payment Dates falling on or after such date, such repayment amounts to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, 
to which a Currency Conversion applies. 

 
3.  Withdrawals made within two calendar months prior to any Principal Payment 
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any 
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal 
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal 
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of 
withdrawal. 
 
4.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a 
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating 
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion 
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.  



 
Schedule 1 

 
 

 

13 

 
5.  If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to 
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule 
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount. 



14 
 

 

 

SCHEDULE 2 
 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
 
 
General 
 
1.  The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”).  (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.) 
 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account 
 
2.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in 
the Table. 
 
Interest and Commitment Charges 
 
3.  The amount allocated to Category 2 is for financing interest and commitment 
charges on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project.  ADB shall be entitled 
to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and commitment charges. 
 
Reallocation 
 
4.  Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table, 
 
  (a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated 
shortfall, amounts of the Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation 
cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to 
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such Category may continue until 
all expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and 
 
  (b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the Borrower, reallocate 
such excess amount to any other Category. 
 
Disbursement Procedures 
 
5.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Schedule 2 

 
 

 

15 

Conditions for Withdrawals from Loan Account 
 
6.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals 
shall be made from the Loan Account to the Special Account of a Participating Bank until 
MOF and such Participating Bank shall have duly entered into an Onlending Agreement 
which shall include the terms and conditions set forth in paragraph 4 of Schedule 5 to the 
Special Operations Loan Agreement and such Onlending Agreement shall have become 
legally binding upon the Borrower and such Participating Bank in accordance with its terms.  

 
 



16 

Attachment to Schedule 2 
 
 

 

TABLE 
 

 
ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS 

(Agriculture and Rural Development Project – Additional Financing) 
 

 
Number 

 
Item 

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 

Financing 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan 

Account 
($) 

Category 

1 Value Chain Investment
a
 32,950,000 100% of total expenditure 

2 
Interest and Commitment 
Charges 2,050,000 100% of amounts due 

 Total 35,000,000 
 

a
Subject to the conditions for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 2.  
















__________________________________________________________________________
LOAN NUMBER 3267-SRI
LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)
(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program – Tranche 1)
between
DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA
and
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
DATED 17 SEPTEMBER 2015
SRI 47381
LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)
LOAN AGREEMENT dated 17 September 2015 between DEMOCRATIC
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
(“ADB”).
WHEREAS
(A) by a framework financing agreement dated 23 April 2015 between the
Borrower and ADB, ADB has agreed to provide a multitranche financing facility to the
Borrower for purposes of financing projects under the Mahaweli Water Security Improvement
Program;
(B) by a periodic financing request dated 23 April 2015, the Borrower has
applied to ADB for a loan from ADB’s Special Funds resources and a loan from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to the
Special Operations Loan Agreement referred to in Recital (C) below;
(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith (“Special Operations Loan
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make a loan (“Special Operations Loan”) to the Borrower
from ADB’s Special Funds resources for an amount in various currencies equivalent to fifty
three million five hundred eighty eight thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR53,588,000) for
the purposes of the Project; and
(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's ordinary
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;
NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
Loan Regulations; Definitions
Section 1.01. All the provisions of the Ordinary Operations Loan
Regulations Applicable to LIBOR-Based Loans Made from ADB's Ordinary Capital
Resources, dated 1 July 2001 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this Loan
Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject,
however, to the following modifications:
(a) Section 3.03 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:
Commitment Charge; Credit; Maturity Premium. (a)
The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge on the
unwithdrawn amount of the Loan at the rate and on the terms
specified in the Loan Agreement.
2
(b) ADB shall provide to the Borrower a credit at
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which credit shall
remain fixed for the term of the Loan. ADB shall apply the
credit against the interest payable by the Borrower.
(c) The Borrower shall pay a maturity premium at
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which maturity
premium shall remain fixed for the term of the Loan. ADB shall
add the maturity premium to the interest payable by the
Borrower.
(d) Section 3.06 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:
Rebate. (a) Following any announcement by
ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be
reduced, ADB shall provide a Rebate to any Borrower with an
outstanding Loan on which a higher Fixed Spread is
applicable. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread
applicable to the outstanding Loan and the Fixed Spread that
will be applied to new Loans (expressed as a percentage per
annum), by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on
which the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
commencing on and after the effective date of the lower Fixed
Spread that will be applied to new Loans.
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its
Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
ADB achieving savings, ADB shall provide a Rebate to the
Borrower. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by
multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall apply the
amount of the Rebate against the interest payable by the
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
calculated.
(e) Section 3.07 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:
Surcharge. (a) Following any announcement by
ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be
increased, any Borrower with an outstanding Loan on which a
lower Fixed Spread is applicable shall pay ADB a Surcharge.
The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined by
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread that will
3
be applied to new Loans and the Fixed Spread applicable to
the outstanding Loan (expressed as a percentage per annum),
by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on which
the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods
commencing on and after the effective date of the higher Fixed
Spread that will be applied to new Loans.
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its
Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in
ADB incurring additional costs, the Borrower shall pay ADB a
Surcharge. The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined
by multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the
Funding Cost Margin was calculated. ADB shall add the
amount of the Surcharge to the interest payable by the
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was
calculated.
Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several
terms defined in the Special Operations Loan Agreement and Loan Regulations have the
respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the context otherwise
requires.
ARTICLE II
The Loan
Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of seventy six million Dollars ($76,000,000) as such
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.
(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 21 years, and a grace
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.
(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement.
Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest
Period equal to the sum of:
4
(a) LIBOR;
(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a
credit of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations;
and
(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan
Regulations.
Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15%
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.
Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable
semiannually on 15 June and 15 December in each year.
Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to
this Loan Agreement.
Section 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt
management:
(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;
(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa;
and
(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.
(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(6) of the
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.
5
ARTICLE III
Use of Proceeds of the Loan
Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions
of this Loan Agreement.
Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.
Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Special
Operations Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has
not been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between
the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory
to ADB.
Section 3.04. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project.
Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2020 or such other date as may from time to time
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.
ARTICLE IV
Particular Covenants
Section 4.01. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project to be
carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity with sound applicable
technical, financial, business, and development practices.
(b) In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities,
the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 5
to the Special Operations Loan Agreement.
Section 4.02. The Borrower shall make available, or cause to be
made available, promptly as needed, and on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, the
funds, facilities, services, land and other resources, as required, in addition to the proceeds
of the Loan, for the carrying out of the Project.
6
Section 4.03. (a) In the carrying out of the Project, the Borrower
shall cause competent and qualified consultants and contractors, acceptable to ADB, to be
employed to an extent and upon terms and conditions satisfactory to the Borrower and ADB.
(b) The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance
with plans, design standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods
acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, as applicable. The Borrower shall furnish, or cause to
be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards,
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made
therein, in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request.
Section 4.04. The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its
departments and agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the
Project facilities are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative
policies and procedures.
Section 4.05. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.
Section 4.06. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project
in accordance with accounting principles acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for
auditing or the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have
the auditors prepare a report (which includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial
statements, compliance with the financial covenants as well as on the use of the procedures
for imprest fund(s) and statement of expenditures) and a management letter (which sets out
the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the
audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the close of each related
fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter,
all in the English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the
audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.
(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 30 days of the date
of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s website.
(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall
otherwise agree.
Section 4.07. The Borrower shall ensure that any facilities relevant to
the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with sound applicable
technical, financial, business, development, operational and maintenance practices.
7
ARTICLE V
Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity
Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional event for
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the
purposes of Section 9.01(l) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to
perform any of its obligations under the Special Operations Loan Agreement.
Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for
acceleration of maturity of the Loan for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan
Regulations: the event specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement has occurred.
ARTICLE VI
Effectiveness
Section 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan
Regulations: the Special Operations Loan Agreement shall have been duly authorized or
ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower, and all conditions
precedent to its effectiveness, other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan
Agreement, shall have been fulfilled.
Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of
the Loan Regulations.
ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous
Section 7.01. Each of the Secretary of MOF, the Deputy Secretary to
the Treasury and the Director General of the Department of External Resources, MOF, of the
Borrower, is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02
of the Loan Regulations.
Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:
8
For the Borrower
Secretary
Ministry of Finance
Colombo 1
Sri Lanka
cc.: Deputy Secretary to the Treasury
Director General, Department of External Resources
Facsimile Number:
+94 11 248-4563.
For ADB
Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines
Facsimile Numbers:
+63 2 636-2444
+63 2 636-2391.

10
SCHEDULE 1
Amortization Schedule
(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program – Tranche 1)
1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total principal
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by
(b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule,
to which a Currency Conversion applies.
Payment Due Installment Share
(Expressed as a %)

2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:
(a) To the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn and
outstanding as of such date in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Schedule.
(b) Any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such withdrawal in amounts
determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the
numerator of which shall be the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph
1 of this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment Share) and the
denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining Original Installment Shares for
Principal Payment Dates falling on or after such date, such repayment amounts to be
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule,
to which a Currency Conversion applies.
3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of
withdrawal.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating
Schedule 1
12
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.
5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.
13
SCHEDULE 2
Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds
General
1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a
Category or Subcategory of the Table).
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account
2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in
the Table.
Reallocation
3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,
(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and
(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.
Disbursement Procedures
4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.
Retroactive Financing
5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made for reimbursement of
eligible expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than
12 months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with consulting services and
procurement of goods, services and civil works, project management, and project
administration, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.
14
Attachment to Schedule 2
TABLE
ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS
(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program – Tranche 1)
Number Item
Total Amount Allocated
for ADB Financing Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan
($) Account
Category
1 Civil Works $54,540,000 51% of total expenditure claimed
2
Mechanical and
Electrical Equipment
$2,090,000 53% of total expenditure claimed
3
Incremental PMU and
PIU Salaries
$450,000 8% of total expenditure claimed
4
Strategic
Communication Plan
$500,000 59% of total expenditure claimed*
5 Training $450,000 53% of total expenditure claimed
6 Unallocated $17,970,000
Total $76,000,000
*Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.





















































LOAN NUMBER 3477-MYA(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations)

(Irrigated Agriculture Inclusive Development Project) 

between

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR 

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED

MYA 47152



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 'Ll between THE REPUBLIC OF
THE UNION OF MYANMAR ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement; and

(B) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's Special 
Funds resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of the Special Operations Loan
Regulations of ADB, dated 1 January 2006 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby made 
applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set 
forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 3.01 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Loan Account. The principal amount of the Loan, as 
denominated in accordance with Section 4.01, shall be credited to the 
Loan Account and may be withdrawn therefrom in accordance with the 
provisions of the Loan Agreement and these Regulations.

(b) Section 4.01 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Denomination of the Loan. The Loan shall be denominated 
in the particular currency specified in the Loan Agreement.

(c) Section 4.02 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Currency of Withdrawal. Withdrawals from the Loan
Account shall be made in the particular currency specified in the Loan 
Agreement.

(d) Section 4.03 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Currency of Payment of Principal. The principal of the Loan shall be 
expressed and repayable in the particular currency specified in the 



2

Loan Agreement. The Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn from 
the Loan Account in accordance with the Loan Agreement.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as amended from time to 
time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as referred to in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(c) “DOA" means the Department of Agriculture within MOALI of the 
Borrower or any successor thereto;

(d) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP" means the environmental 
management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS;

(f) "GAP" means the Gender Action Plan agreed between ADB and the 
Borrower for the Project and set out as one of the linked documents to the RRP;

(g) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting 
Services;

(h) “Indigenous Peoples Plan" or “IPP” means the indigenous peoples 
plan for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(i) Indigenous Peoples Safeguards" means the principles and
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS;

(j) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means the initial
environmental examination for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(k) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS;

(I) "IWRM” means integrated water resources management;

(m) “IWUMD" means the Irrigation and Water Utilization Management 
Department within MOALI of the Borrower or any successor thereto;



3

(n) “Loan Disbursement Handbook’' means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time);

(o) “Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation” 
means the Borrower’s Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation or any 
successor thereto;

(p) “MOALI” means the Borrower's Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Irrigation or any successor thereto;

(q) "O&M” means operations and maintenance;

(r) "Output" means the outputs described in paragraph 2 of Schedule 1 to 
this Loan Agreement;

(s) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
10 October 2016 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time 
in accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(t) “PMU" means Project Management Unit as further described in the 
PAM;

(u) “Procurement Guidelines" means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(v) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
10 October 2016 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time 
in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(w) "Project Areas" means the areas within the territory of the Borrower 
that covers Magway, Yamethin, Shwebo and Meiktila districts;

(x) "Project Executing Agency" for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of, the Loan Regulations means MOALI or any successor thereto acceptable to 
ADB, which is responsible for carrying out of the Project;

(y) “Project facilities" means facilities to be installed, constructed, 
reconstructed, developed or operationalized under the Project;

(z) “PSC" means Project Steering Committee as further described in the 
PAM;

(aa) "Resettlement and Ethnic Groups Framework” or “REGF” means 
resettlement and ethnic groups framework prepared for the Project, including any updates 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(bb) “Resettlement and Ethnic Groups Plan” or “REGP” means the 
resettlement and ethnic groups plan prepared for the Project, including any updates thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;



4

(cc) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(dd) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with implementation of and 
compliance with the EMP, the REGP and the IPP (as applicable), including any corrective 
and preventative actions;

(ee) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, and project related 
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding 
Consulting Services; and

(ff) “WUG” means the water user group that will be involved in Project 
implementation.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of seventy-five million Dollars ($75,000,000).

Section 2.02. (a) The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest
charge at the rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, 
on the amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to 
time.

(b) The term "grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan
shall be payable semiannually on 15 June and 15 December in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower
shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used 
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project.

Section 3.05. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of
Goods, Works, and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures 
relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries 
of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as 
eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Consulting Services which meet such other 
eligibility requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time 
to time.

Section 3.06. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.



6

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project 
in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes 
the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 
6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to 
time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.


IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

THE REPUBLIC OF THE 
MYANMAR

UNION OF

DAW NWE NWE WIN
Director General

Treasury Department 
Ministry of Planning and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
,cAristopAeK|Pohr

Officer-In-Charge
Myanmar Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is increased income and reduction of poverty for
rural populations in Project Areas.

2. The Project shall comprise the following outputs:

Output 1: Effective Agriculture Value Chains in Oilseeds, Pulses and 
Horticultural Crops Developed. Under this Output, the Project shall support farming, landless 
communities and the other key participants in selected townships within Magway district 
(Magway region), Meiktila and Yamethin districts (Mandalay region), and Shwebo district 
(Sagaing region) through value chain and private sector development.

Output 2: Reliability of Agricultural Water Supplies Improved and Irrigated 
Area Increased. Under this Output, the Project shall support rehabilitation, modernization, 
and improved management of about five irrigation systems to improve the reliability of water 
supplies on about 20,000 hectares within Magway, Meiktila, Shwebo and Yamethin districts.

3. The Project shall include consulting services and is expected to be completed
by 31 December 2023.


12

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in 
the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category 2 is for financing the interest charge on the
Loan during the implementation period of the Project.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Conditions for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals shall be 
made from the Loan Account until the Borrower has (a) established the PMU to the satisfaction of 
ADB; and (b) trained the PMU staff in financial management.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS 
(Irrigated Agriculture Inclusive Development Project)

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing

Category 
($)

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1. Works** 47,182,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
2. Consulting Services** 2,220,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
3. Service Providers** 3,660,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*

4. Agricultural Value Chain Development** 15,110,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*

5. Vehicles** 511,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
6. Equipment** 249,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
7. Office Materials** 435,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
8. Operational Costs** 3,519,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*
9. Interest Charge 2,114,000 100% of amounts due

Total 75,000,000
*Exclusive of taxes and duties within the territory of the Borrower.
**Subject to the conditions of withdrawals described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3 to this Loan 
Agreement.



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;
(b) National Competitive Bidding; and
(c) Shopping.

Domestic Preference

5. The Borrower may grant a margin of preference in the evaluation of bids
under international competitive bidding in accordance with paragraphs 2.55(a) and 2.56 of 
the Procurement Guidelines for domestically manufactured Goods and paragraphs 2.55(b) 
and 2.56 of the Procurement Guidelines for domestic Works.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



15
Schedule 4

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not award Works contracts until:

(a) the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation 
has granted the final approval of the IEE of the Project;

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP 
into the Works contract; and

(c) the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REGP 
based on the Project's detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of such 
REGP.

Consulting Services

8. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

9. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants for technical advisory and
Project management support in accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting 
individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

10. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB's Review of Procurement Decisions

12. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with
the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower shall ensure that each subproject shall meet the following
selection criteria:

(a) it shall be at least Category B in terms of environmental and social 
safeguards impacts as defined in the SPS;

(b) all land acquired and used for the subproject, including for 
development of tertiary canals, must be voluntarily donated or through 
other acceptable arrangement;

(c) should not be covered by other ongoing or proposed projects financed 
by ADB or any other development partners;

(d) there should be formal evidence of local demand for the subproject 
reflected in a letter from the township administrator;

(e) the beneficiaries should include sharecroppers, poor farmers, and 
women farmers; and

(f) should be economically viable; and technically, socially and 
environmentally feasible.

3. The Borrower shall ensure that each irrigation-related subproject shall meet
the following additional criteria:

(a) the irrigation system shall have low irrigation efficiency and water 
productivity with scope for substantial enhancement of both irrigation 
efficiency and water productivity;

(b) should involve only rehabilitation of existing systems and should not 
involve construction of new systems, any new supplementary 
structures or canals must be within existing command areas;

(c) should involve rehabilitation of primary, secondary and minor canals to 
ensure that water reaches the farm;



17
Schedule 5

(d) must have a command area that is conducive to diversification to 
higher value crops and some evidence of actual diversified cropping, 
at least in the summer;

(e) should have adequate physical access roads and bridges for input 
suppliers and access to markets, subject to minor improvements as 
part of the rehabilitation program;

(f) must have adequate water available to meet its irrigation water 
requirements for the proposed typical annual crop plan at least 4 years 
out of 5 years;

(g) the farmers must be willing to ensure maintenance and management 
of terminal units and priority will be given to those demonstrating 
existing community groups; and

(h) the coverage area of the subproject should be between 400 and 
10,000 hectares.

4. The Borrower shall ensure that all farmers within irrigated areas and at least
2/3 of farmers in neighboring benefited areas should (a) be granted permission by the 
relevant authorities to grow crops of the farmers’ choice in all seasons; and (b) have formally 
registered land use certificates for all their land in the Project Areas.

Subproject Selection Process

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the subprojects shall be selected through the
following process:

(a) the PMU, in consultation with IWUMD, DOA and the relevant regional 
and district authorities, shall conduct a feasibility review of potential 
subprojects;

(b) the PMU shall screen and rank subprojects in accordance with the 
selection criteria reflected in paragraphs 2 and 3 above and submit the 
ranking to the PSC for their consideration;

(c) the PSC shall consider and provide necessary concurrence to the 
proposed subprojects prepared and recommended by the PMU; and

(d) ADB shall issue a no-objection to the selected subprojects.

Environment

6. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project facilities 
comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, 
health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements 
set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.



18
Schedule 5

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 
under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities are 
implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in the REGF, REGP, and any 
corrective or preventative actions set forth in the Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
the REGP, the Borrower shall ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes place 
in connection with the Project until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REGP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REGP.

Indigenous Peoples

9. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation and operation of the Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all 
applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous peoples; (b) the 
Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in the IPP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

10. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human
resources to fully implement the EMP, the REGP and the IPP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

11. The Borrower shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works
contain provisions that reguire contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the 
IEE, the EMP, the REGF, the REGP and the IPP (to the extent they 
concern impacts on affected people during construction), and any 
corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts 



19
Schedule 5

that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the 
Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the REGF, the 
REGP and the IPP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

12. The Borrower shall do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the REGF, the REGP 
and the IPP, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or 
impacts, with detailed description of the event and proposed corrective 
action plan;

(c) no later than one month after the Effective Date, engage gualified and 
experienced external experts or gualified NGOs under a selection 
process and terms of reference acceptable to ADB, to verify 
information produced through the Project monitoring process, and 
facilitate the carrying out of any verification activities by such external 
experts; and

(d) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and reguirements set forth in the EMP, the REGF, the REGP or the 
IPP promptly after becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited-List of Investments

13. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of 
the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

14. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project reguiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower's applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 



20
Schedule 5

occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under 
the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, 
particularly women.

15. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 13 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

16. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance
with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for 
contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are 
allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, 
including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly 
monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and output targets include, but 
not limited to having at least 30% women's involvement in all training and in membership of 
common interest groups, farmer field schools and WUGs.

Counterpart Support

17. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient
funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services 
contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

18. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

19. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project.






































































47181-002: Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project


LOAN NUMBER 3434-TAJ(SF) GRANT NUMBER 0498-TAJ(SF)

FINANCING AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations)

(Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project)

between

REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED hex'

TAJ 47181



FINANCING AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations)

FINANCING AGREEMENT dated between REPUBLIC OF
TAJIKISTAN (“Beneficiary”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK {“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Beneficiary has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Financing Agreement;

(B) the Beneficiary has also applied to the Government of Japan, through 
the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction (“JFPR”), for a grant of three million Dollars 
($3,000,000) to assist in financing Part B of the Project and to be administered by ADB, upon 
terms and conditions set forth in a grant agreement between the Beneficiary and ADB 
(“JFPR Grant Agreement”); and

(C) ADB has agreed to provide financing by making a loan and a grant to 
the Beneficiary from ADB’s Special Funds resources upon the terms and conditions set forth 
herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations and Grant Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of the Special Operations Loan 
Regulations of ADB, dated 1 January 2006 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable 
to this Financing Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth 
herein, subject however, to the following modifications:

(a) The term “Loan Agreement", wherever it appears in the Loan 
Regulations, shall be substituted by the term “Financing Agreement”.

(b) The term “Borrower”, wherever it appears in the Loan Regulations, 
shall be substituted by the term “Beneficiary” as defined in the opening paragraph of this 
Financing Agreement.

Sec tion 1.02. All provisions of the Special Operations Grant 
Regulations of ADB, dated 7 February 2005 (“Grant Regulations”), are hereby made 
applicable to this Financing Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject however, to the following modifications:

(a) The term “Grant Agreement”, wherever it appears in the Grant 
Regulations, shall be substituted by the term “Financing Agreement”.



2

(b) The term “Recipient”, wherever it appears in the Grant Regulations, 
shall be substituted by the term “Beneficiary” as defined in the opening paragraph of this 
Financing Agreement.

Sec tion 1.03. Wherever used in this Financing Agreement, the 
several terms defined in the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations have the 
respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the context otherwise 
requires. Additional terms used in this Financing Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “ALRI” means the Beneficiary’s Agency of Land Reclamation and 
Irrigation;

(b) “CIS” means the Chubek Irrigation System;

(c) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as amended from time to 
time);

(d) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan or the Grant as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Financing Agreement;

(e) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1 and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS;

(g) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, 
including any update thereto, and agreed to between the Beneficiary and ADB;

(h) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan or the Grant; and including related services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, but excluding 
Consulting Services;

(i) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Beneficiary and cleared by 
ADB;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time);

(k) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

(I) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
18 July 2016 and agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the Beneficiary and ADB;

(m) “Part" means a part of the Project as described in paragraph 2 of 
Schedule 1 to this Financing Agreement;



3

(n) “PIO” means each any of the project implementation offices referred to 
in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3 to this Financing Agreement;

(o) “PMO” means the project management unit referred to in paragraph 6 
of Schedule 3 to this Financing Agreement;

(p) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(q) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
18 July 2016 and agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(r) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations, means the ALRI or any 
successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

(s) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Beneficiary to ADB that describes progress with implementation of and 
compliance with the EMP, including any corrective and preventative actions;

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Works" means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan or the Grant, including services such as drilling or mapping, and project 
related services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract, but 
excluding Consulting Services; and

(v) “WUA” means water users’ association.

ARTICLE II

The Loan and the Grant

Section 2.01. ADB agrees to provide to the Beneficiary from ADB’s 
Special Funds resources, on terms and conditions set forth in this Financing Agreement:

(a) a loan in various currencies equivalent to thirteen million seven 
hundred fifty-eight thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR13,758,000) 
(“Loan”); and

(b) a grant in the amount of five million eight hundred fifty thousand 
Dollars ($5,850,000) (“Grant”).

Section 2.02. (a) The Beneficiary shall pay to ADB an interest
charge at the rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, 
on the amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to 
time.



4

(b) The term “grace period” as used in paragraph (a) of this Section 
means the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the 
amortization schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Financing Agreement.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 November and 15 May in each year.

Section 2.04. The Beneficiary shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Financing Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan and the Grant

Section 3.01. The Beneficiary shall cause the proceeds of the Loan 
and the Grant to be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance 
with the provisions of this Financing Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan and the Grant shall be 
allocated and withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Financing 
Agreement, as such Schedule 3 may be amended from time to time by agreement between 
the Beneficiary and ADB.

Section 3. 03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Beneficiary 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grant in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this 
Financing Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2022, and the Grant Closing Date for the purposes 
of Section 8.02 of the Grant Regulations shall be 30 June 2022 or, in each case, such other 
date as may from time to time be agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Beneficiary shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Financing Agreement.



5

Section 4.02. (a) The Beneficiary, through the ALRI, shall (I)
maintain separate accounts and records for the Project, including separate accounts and 
records for the Loan and the Grant; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes 
the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan and the Grant 
proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of 
the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no 
later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to 
time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Beneficiary shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Beneficiary’s financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Beneficiary, unless the Beneficiary shall 
otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Beneficiary shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to 
the effectiveness of this Financing Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations and Section 9.01(e) of the Grant Regulations, respectively: the JFPR Grant 
Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and delivered on behalf of the Beneficiary 
and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Financing Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations and Section 9.02(c) of the Grant 
Regulations, respectively, to be included in the opinion or opinions to be furnished to ADB: 
the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and delivered on behalf of 
the Beneficiary, and is legally binding on the Beneficiary in accordance with its terms.



6

Section 5.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Financing 
Agreement is specified for the effectiveness of the Financing Agreement for the purposes of 
Section 9.04 of the Loan Regulations and Section 9.04 of the Grant Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Beneficiary is designated 
as representative of the Beneficiary for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations and Section 11.02 of the Grant Regulations.

Section 6. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations and Section 11.01 of the Grant Regulations:

For the Beneficiary

Ministry of Finance
3, Akademikov Rajabovikh Avenue
734025 Dushanbe City
Tajikistan

Facsimile Numbers:

(992)372 213-329
(992)372 216-237

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6, ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2017.



7

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Financing Agreement to be 
signed in their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be 
delivered at the principal office of ADB.

REPUBLIC OF TAJIKISTAN

By <4
ABDUSALOM K( QURBONIYON 

Minister
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

__J/j7
CH^(G CHINGYU 

Country Director 
Tajikistan Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase agricultural production in the CIS
area of the Pyanj River Basin in the territory of the Beneficiary.

2. The Project shall comprise the following parts:

Part A - Modernization and operationalization of climate-proofed CIS water 
resource management infrastructure, including:

(a) modernization and rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure and its climate-proofing;

(b) construction of sediment-excluding basin;

(c) modernization and rehabilitation of at least two cascade irrigation 
pumping systems (Urtaboz and Janubi); and

(d) capacity development of the ALRI staff through provision of equipment, 
training and development of monitoring and evaluation system;

Part B - Improvement of farm management capacity and water use skills, 
including:

(a) promotion of profitable farm management and efficient water use;

(b) production of high-quality seeds; and

(c) establishment and possible reorganization of WUAs and capacity 
development of WUAs and beneficiaries.

3. Consulting Services shall be provided to support the above activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2021.




11

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan and Grant Proceeds

General

1. The tables attached to this Schedule set forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant. Table 1 sets forth 
the allocation of the Loan proceeds to each such Category. Table 2 sets out the allocation of 
the Grant proceeds to each such Category (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of Table 1 and Table 2, respectively.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan and the Grant Accounts

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant
shall be disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set 
forth in Table 1 and Table 2, respectively.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category 3 of Table 1 is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of the Loan proceeds and the Grant proceeds
and the withdrawal percentages set forth in Table 1 and Table 2, respectively,

(a) if the amount of the Loan or the Grant allocated to any Category 
appears to be insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that 
Category, ADB may, by notice to the Beneficiary, (i) reallocate to such 
Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, 
amounts of the Loan or the Grant which have been allocated to 
another Category but, in the opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet 
other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation cannot fully meet the 
estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to 
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such 
Category may continue until all expenditures thereunder shall have 
been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan or the Grant then allocated to any Category 
appears to exceed all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, 
by notice to the Beneficiary, reallocate such excess amount to any 
other Category.

Disbursement Procedure

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant
shall be disbursed in accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from the Loan and the Grant Accounts

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Financing Agreement and except
as ADB may otherwise agree, no withdrawals shall be made from the Loan Account and the 
Grant Account until the Beneficiary has issued a resolution authorizing (a) the PMO set up 
under the Building Climate Resilience in the Pyanj River Basin Project financed through 
Grant No. 0352-TAJ(EF) to serve as the PMO for this Project; and (b) enhancing the PMO 
and establishing PIOs in Hamandoni, Farkhor and Vose.



13
Attachment 1 to Schedule 3

TABLE 1

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS 
(Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project)

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
(SDR) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan 

Account

1 Part A (Civil Works; Vehicles, 
Pumps, Motors and
Auxiliaries)**

11,802,000 100% of total 
expenditure claimed*

2 Part A (Office Equipment; 
Office Accommodation; 
Supplies and Others)**

319,000 100% of total 
expenditure claimed

3 Interest Charge 502,000 100% of amount due

4 Unallocated 1,135,000

Total 13,758,000

‘Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Beneficiary. 
“Withdrawal is subject to provision of paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.



14
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

TABLE 2

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF GRANT PROCEEDS 
(Water Resources Management in Pyanj River Basin Project)

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Grant Account

1 Part A (Machinery; PMO and 
PIO Salaries; Consulting 
Services)**

5,079,145 100% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2 Part A (Survey, Study and 
Design; Trainings and 
Workshops; Office/Vehicle 
Operation and Maintenance)**

234,360 100% of total expenditure 
claimed

3 Unallocated 536,495

Total 5,850,000

*Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Beneficiary.
**Withdrawal is subject to provision of paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.



15

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Financing
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

3. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall only be
procured on the basis of the methods of procurement set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding; and

(c) Shopping.

4. The methods of procurement are subject to, among other things, the detailed
arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. The Beneficiary may 
only modify the methods of procurement or threshold values with the prior agreement of 
ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates to the Procurement Plan.

National Competitive Bidding

5. The Beneficiary and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Beneficiary’s national 
competitive bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any 
modifications or clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB 
shall be set out in the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed 
modifications and clarifications shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Beneficiary and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

6. The Beneficiary shall not award any Works contracts until:

(a) the Beneficiary has granted the final approval of the IEE; and

(b) the Beneficiary has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP
into the Works contract.



16
Schedule 4

Consulting Services

7. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Beneficiary shall apply Quality- and
Cost-Based Selection for selecting and engaging Consulting Services.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

8. (a) The Beneficiary shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Beneficiary shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

9. The Beneficiary shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

10. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Beneficiary and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.

Eligible Source of Procurement of Good, Works and Consulting Services

11. Good, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the Project
from non-member countries of ADB.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project and Operation of 
Project Facilities; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the Project is implemented In accordance
with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Beneficiary and ADB. In the 
event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Financing Agreement, the provisions of 
this Financing Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Beneficiary shall ensure that:

(a) the implementation of the Project does not affect, or be affected by, 
any of obligations and commitments of the Beneficiary under the 
international treaties entered into with regard to the Amy Darya River 
and the Pyanj River; and

(b) contractors, suppliers, and consultants under the Project have smooth 
and timely access to necessary construction, design, study, and 
survey sites, free of charge, including timely access to up to date 
information regarding security situations and arrangements at the 
international border with the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

Environment

3. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project facilities 
comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Beneficiary relating to environment, 
health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements 
set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the Project does not have any indigenous
peoples or involuntary resettlement impacts, all within the meaning of the SPS. In the event 
that the Project does have any such impact, the Beneficiary shall take ail steps required to 
ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the Beneficiary 
and with the SPS.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

5. The Beneficiary shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for
Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people 



18
Schedule 5

during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Beneficiary with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts 
that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the 
Project that were not considered in the I EE and the EMP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Prohibited List of Investments

6. The Beneficiary shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan and the Grant are
used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in 
Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

7. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the core labor standards and the
Beneficiary’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Beneficiary shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents 
and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other 
things: (a) comply with the Beneficiary's applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate 
applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of 
contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding 
the Project area, particularly women.

8. The Beneficiary shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set
forth in paragraph 7 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

9. The Beneficiary shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance
with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for 
contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are 
allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, 
including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly 
monitored and reported to ADB.



19
Schedule 5

Governance and Anticorruption

10. The Beneficiary shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to 
the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

11. The Beneficiary shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to
ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the 
right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing and 
implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

12. The Beneficiary shall ensure that updated information on the Project is
provided on ALRI’s website, including information on the performance of the Project, 
business opportunities, bidding process and guidelines, outcome of biddings and summary 
progress reports of the Project.

Operation & Maintenance

13. The Beneficiary shall ensure that after the Project completion necessary funds
are made available for full O&M of the CIS through annual budgetary allocations and 
irrigation service fees. The Beneficiary shall ensure that, (a) no later than 1 year before the 
Project completion, the ALRI develops an Asset Management and O&M Plan for the CIS, 
satisfactory to ADB, which will, among other things, set out the required increases of annual 
budget allocations and the irrigation service fees, and stipulate that the irrigation service fees 
will be used exclusively for O&M of the CIS, including expenses for the services provided by 
local district offices of the WUA Support Unit under the ALRI; and (b) by the Project 
completion, the agreed O&M Plan is approved by the government resolution.

Counterpart Support

14. The Beneficiary shall ensure that necessary funding is made available for the
period from 1 January 2019 through the Project completion to fully finance staff of the Pyanj 
River Basin Organization and its sub-office in Gorno Badakhshan Autonomous province of 
the Beneficiary.

15. In addition to the foregoing, the Beneficiary shall ensure that the ALRI has
sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Consulting 
Services contract.

Refund

16. If ADB determines that any amount of the Loan and the Grant has been used
in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of this Financing Agreement, the Beneficiary 
shall, upon notice by ADB to the Beneficiary, promptly refund such amount to ADB. Except 
as ADB may otherwise determine, ADB shall cancel all amounts refunded pursuant to this 
provision.

























































LOAN NUMBER 3731-BAN

LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)

(Rural Connectivity Improvement Project)

between

PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 13 JANUARY 2019

BAN 47243



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 13 January 2019 between PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC 
OF BANGLADESH (“Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a.project design advance agreement dated 5 July 2016 between ADB . 
and the Borrower (“PDA Agreement"), ADB provided a project design advance concessional 
loan (“PDA Loan") from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in an amount in various currencies 
equivalent to one million four hundred twenty-four thousand Special Drawing Rights 
(SDR1,424,000) for the purposes of preparatory activities for the Project;

(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“Concessional Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to provide a concessional loan 
(“Concessional Loan") from its ordinary capital resources in the amount of one hundred million 
Dollars ($100,000,000) (“Concessional Loan") to the Borrower for the purposes of financing 
expenditures of the Project;

(D) the Project will be carried out by the Local Government Engineering 
Department (“LGED") of the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and 
Cooperatives (“MOLGRDC"), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to LGED 
the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; 
and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations"), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “Community Development Framework" or “CPF” means the community 
development framework, including any update thereto, as .agreed to 
between the Borrower and ADB;

(b) "Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds .of the Loan and the Concessional Loan;

(c) “Department of Environment” means the Borrower’s Department of 
Environment or any successors thereto;

(d) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) "Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(g) "Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the 
Concessional Loan, including any related Nonconsulting Services such 
as transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance;

(h) "IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(i) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) "Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Concessional 
Loan;

(I) "PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 17 
September 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(m) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
17 September 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policyr 



3

the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(n) “Procurement Policy* means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(o) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) . “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means LGED or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which' is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(q) “Project facilities* means the facilities to be improved, constructed or 
provided under the Project;

(r) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
Implementation of and compliance with the EMP, Including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(s) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Target Areas” means the 34 districts in which the Project roads are 
located;

(v) “Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards” 
means the principles and requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 
3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the 
Concessional Loan, including any related Nonconsulting Services and 
project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000), as such 



4

amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period’1 as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal tothe sum of:

(a) LIBOR;

(b) 0,60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit
of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations; and

(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0,15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn 
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 1 May and 1 November in each year.

Sec tion 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion 
of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding 
from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a "Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(f) of the 



5

Loan Regulations, and shall be effected In accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 May 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02, (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (lv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors' opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.



6

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
Inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01, The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Concessional Loan has become 
liable for suspension or cancellation for any reason whatsoever.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: either 
of the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6,01. The following Is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Concessional Loan Agreement has been duly executed and delivered, and 
all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness 
of this Loan Agreement) has been fulfilled or arrangements satisfactory to ADB shall have 
been made for the fulfillment thereof within a period of time satisfactory to ADB.

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations,



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Senior Secretary or Secretary or any Additional 
Secretary or Chief, Joint Secretary or Joint Chief, Deputy Secretary or Deputy Chief, Senior 
Assistant Secretary or Senior Assistant Chief, Assistant Secretary or Assistant Chief of the 
Economic Relations Division of the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Economic Relations Division
Ministry of Finance
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Sher-e-Bangla Nagar
Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh

Facsimile Number:

(880)2-918-0788

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2340,



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

PEOPLE’S . REPUBLIC OF
BANGLADESH

MONOWAR AHMED 
Secretary 

Economic Relations Division 
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

MANMOHAN PARKASH 
Country Director 

Bangladesh Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase transport efficiency and to generate
related employment in the Target Areas.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) (i) improving the condition of approximately 1,700 km of rural roads to
all-weather standards which incorporate climate resilience and safety 
features; and (ii) maintaining approximately 242 km of such rural roads 
for a period of five years after completion of the Works;

(b) (i) provision of training for LGED on road asset management, road
safety, contract management, financial management and climate- 
resilient road design and construction; (ii) raising the awareness of road 
users on road safety, human trafficking, and prevention of sexually 
transmitted infections; and (iii) enhancing the skills of women workers 
on road construction and maintenance; and

(c) . upgrading the rural road masterplan for the entire territory of the 
Borrower, using a geographic information system for selecting priority 
rural roads.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 November 2023. This is
expected to cover approximately 3 out of the 5 years under the maintenance period as referred 
to in paragraph 2(a) above.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.



2, If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date In accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall, be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, 
to deduct any amounts referred to In paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies,

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable oh any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal,

4, Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount In its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either (a) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to 



12

Schedule 2

said Conversion; or (b) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines; 
the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated In more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1, The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table,)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2, Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion Of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Goods, Works and Services, 
subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount



14

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

*Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower,

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works 80,105,000 75% of total expenditure claimed
2 Equipment and Vehicles 3,375,000 75% of total expenditure claimed
3 Consulting Services 9,700,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*
4 Equipment Operation 

and Maintenance 
(Project Management)

1,140,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

5 Unallocated 5,680,000
TOTAL 100,000,000



15

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED. to ensure that the Project is
implemented In accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth In the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
. accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 

Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements, The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications  set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

must.be

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED does not award any Works or
Nonconsulting Services contracts which Involves environmental impacts until:

(a) the Department of Environment has granted the final approval of the 
IEE; and

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into 
the Works contract.

Community Participation Framework

4. The Borrower shall, or shall cause LGED to, implement the CPF as agreed with
ADB and in conformity with all relevant applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower.



16

Schedule 4

5. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause LGED to ensure, no section or part thereof
under any works contract awarded for the relevant Subproject shall be handed over to the 
contractor unless the applicable provisions of the CPF have been Implemented in full.

Operation and Maintenance

6. The Borrower shall ensure that it allocates sufficient funds for operation and
maintenance of the roads to be constructed or upgraded under the Project, and ensure that 
the funds are made available to LGED on a timely basis for the same purpose. This shall 
include providing financing for the remainder of the 5-year maintenance period under the 
maintenance contract financed by the Loan or the Concessional Loan after Project completion.

7. In relation to the 5-year maintenance contract financed by the Loan or the
Concessional Loan;

(a) the Borrower shall exercise its rights under such contract in such a 
manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB and to 
accomplish the purposes of the Loan or the Concessional Loan, as 
applicable; and

(b) in the event that a contractor fails to perform the maintenance of the 
Project roads required under such contract, the Borrower, through 
LGED, shall assume the maintenance responsibility by providing 
sufficient funds and making appropriate implementation arrangements.

Environment

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the preparation,
design, construction/implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Involuntary Resettlement and Tribes, Minor Races. Ethnic Sects and Communities

9. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the Project does hot
have any Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards impacts or Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects 
and Communities Safeguards impacts. If the Project does have any such impacts, the 
Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

10. The Borrower shall make available or cause LGED to make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.



17

Schedule 4

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

11. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that all bidding documents
and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(c) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people 
during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(d) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(e) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that were not considered in the IEE or 
the EMP or any resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project;

(f) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(g) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at . 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

12. The Borrower shall cause LGED to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

13, The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.



18

Schedule 4

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

14. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower's applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED includes specific provisions In the 
bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the 
contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and 
regulations and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use 
child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do 
not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to 
collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to 
disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

15. The Borrower shall cause LGED to strictly monitor compliance with the
requirements set forth in paragraph 14 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

16. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts Include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include: (i) target at least 40% women participants in project orientation seminars 
and planning of project roads; (il) provide on-the-job training to all women workers on basic 
construction, improvement, reconstruction works and maintenance skills; (iii) target at least 
20% women workers to be employed for road improvement works; (iv) conduct awareness on 
sexually-transmitted infections including HIV/AIDS, and anti-human-trafficking to at least 40% 
of students, teachers and parents along the project roads; (v) implement core labor standards 
with' gender-inclusive provisions and women-friendly work environments; (vi) conduct road 
safety awareness programs to at least 40% of students, teachers and parents along the project 
roads; and (vil) conduct technical training of LGED staff including 30% women staff.

Counterpart Support

17. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities
arising from any Works, Goods and/or Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

18, The Borrower shall, and shall ensure that LGED, (a) complies with ADB’s.
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.



19

Schedule 4

19. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that anticorruption
provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and. contracts, Including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other 
service providers as they relate to the Project.


































































49026-002: Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in the Northeastern Provinces Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3633-VlE(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in .the Northeastern Provinces Sector Project)

between

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 42. AoriZ Z.OA2

VIE 49026



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated A2. Ap«^ 70^ between SOCIALIST 
REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by the provinces of Bac Kan, Cao Bang, 
Ha Giang, and Lang Son (“Project Provinces”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make 
available to the Project Provinces the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “ARVC” means agriculture and rural value chain;

(b) “Candidate Subproject” means a candidate subproject for financing 
under the Project, a list of which has been agreed upon between the 
Project Provinces and ADB and provided in the PAM;

(c) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);



2

(d) ' “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan to help in carrying out activities as described in 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(e) “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” 
means the environmental assessment and review framework for the 
Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the 
Project Provinces and cleared by ADB;

(f) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means each 
environmental management plan for a Subproject, including any 
update thereto, incorporated in the respective IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and'requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable.) of 
the SPS;

( (h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any
x update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Project Provinces and

cleared by ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(j) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(k) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means each initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Project Provinces pursuant to 
the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

( (I) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(m) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(o) “Onlending Agreement” means, the agreement or agreements entered 
into between the Borrower’s Ministry of Finance and each of the 
Project Provinces for the purposes of relending a portion of the 
proceeds of this Loan as specified in Section 3.01 of this Loan 
Agreement;



3

(p) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
2 November 2017 and agreed between the Project Provinces and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(q) . “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
2 November 2017 and agreed between the Project Provinces and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(s) “Project facilities” means facilities developed, constructed, updated 
and/or maintained under the Project;

(t) “Project Province” means each of the Borrower’s provinces of Bac 
Kan, Cao Bang, Ha Giang, and Lang Son where the Project is carried 
out;

(u) “Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Development Framework” or 
“REMDF” means the resettlement and ethnic minority development 
framework for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Project Provinces and cleared by ADB;

(v) “Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Development Plan” or “REMDP” 
means each resettlement and ethnic minority development plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Project Provinces pursuant to the requirements set forth in the 
REMDF and cleared by ADB;

(w) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(x) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Project Provinces to ADB that describes progress 
with implementation of, and compliance with, the EMPs and the 
REMDPs (as applicable), including any corrective and preventative 
actions;

(y) “Subproject” means a subproject to be selected and carried out in 
accordance with paragraph 15 of Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement 
and the relevant provisions of the PAM; and

(z) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.



4

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred fifty million Dollars ($150,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule.set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 January and 15 July in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall (i) make a portion of the
proceeds of the Loan available to the Project Provinces through budget allocation, and (ii) 
relend the balance of the proceeds of the Loan to the Project Provinces under the respective 
Onlending Agreements, all upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.



5

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of 
Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures 
relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries 
of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as 
eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works and Consulting Services which meet such other 
eligibility requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time 
to time.

Section 3. 05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2023 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4. 02. The Borrower, through the Project Provinces, shall 
enable ADB's representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant 
records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Project Provinces to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Onlending Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB 
and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under any Onlending Agreements shall be 
assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.



6

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Delegation of Authority

Section 6.01. The Borrower hereby designates the Project Provinces 
as its agents for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or 
permitted under Section 3.03 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02 and 
5.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by the 
Project Provinces pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan 
Agreement shall be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as 
if taken by the Borrower.

Section 6.03. The authority conferred on the Project Provinces under
Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the 
Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Governor of the State Bank of Vietnam of the 
Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 
of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

State Bank of Vietnam
47-49 LyThai To 
Hanoi, Viet Nam



7

Facsimile Numbers:

(84-4) 38250-612 
(84-4) 38258-385

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2331.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

LEMINH HUNG 
Governor 

State Bank of Viet Nam

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

ERIC SIDGWICK
Country Director

Viet Nam Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase production, and movement of goods
and passengers within the Project Provinces and to major domestic and international 
markets.

2. The Project shall comprise the following Outputs.

Output 1: Road network connectivity among the Project Provinces 
improved. Carrying out Subprojects to upgrade provincial and district roads, 
including road safety measures and training.

Output 2: Rural water supply improved. Carrying out Subprojects to 
develop water supply schemes.

Output 3: ARVC infrastructure in Lang Son province improved. Carrying 
out Subprojects to support the development of shared horticultural trade and 
marketing services for horticultural commodities, through provision of viability 
gap grants to the selected enterprises and producers groups.

Output 4: Decentralized public asset management processes 
established. Supporting the implementation of the Borrower’s decentralized 
public asset management program.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2023.



10

The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.



11

SCHEDULES

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed put of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge” is for financing the
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if 
such reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation 
with the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other 
Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for:

(a) Category 1A, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Bac Kan Province, in form and substance 
satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and executed and 
delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized government 
entity) and the Bac Kan Province, and is legally binding upon the 
parties thereto in accordance with its terms;

(b) Category 1B, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Cao Bang Province,. in form and 
substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Cao Bang Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms;

(c) Categories 1C and 2, until the Onlending Agreement between the 
Borrower’s Ministry of Finance and the Ha Giang Province, in form 
and substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Ha Giang Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms; and

(d) Category 1D, until the Onlending Agreement between the Borrower’s 
Ministry of Finance and the Lang Son Province, in form and 
substance satisfactory to ADB, has been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower (or its authorized 
government entity) and the Lang Son Province, and is legally binding 
upon the parties thereto in accordance with its terms.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated for 

ADB Financing 
(Dollar)

Basis for Withdrawal from 
the Loan Account**

Category Subcategory
1 Project Costs 144,686,400

1A. forBac Kan Province* 32,884,373 100% of total expenditure claimed***

1B for Cao Bang Province* ' 33,039,415
100% of total expenditure 
claimed***

1C for Ha Giang Province* 31,418,624
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

1D for Lang Son Province* 47,343,988
100% of total expenditure 
claimed****

2 Consulting Services for Ha Giang Province* 1,587,004
66 percent of total expenditure 
claimed***

3 Interest Charge 3,726,596 100% of amounts due

TOTAL 150,000,000
Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.

** Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
*** Exclusive of loan implementation consulting services.
**** Exclusive of loan implementation consulting services and detailed engineering design consulting services.



14

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) National Competitive Bidding; and

(b) Shopping.

National Competitive Bidding

5. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

6. The Project Provinces shall not award any Works contract for the respective
Subprojects which involves environmental impacts until it has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the Borrower’s competent 
authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.



15
Schedule 4

7. The Project Provinces shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject
involving involuntary resettlement and/or indigenous peoples impacts until the relevant 
Project Province has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REMDP for the Subproject 
based on the Subproject’s detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of the REMDP.

Consulting Services

8. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

9. The Borrower shall apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Fixed Budget Selection for Project audit

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

10. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

12. Contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB,
unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement 
Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Environmental, Social, 
Financial and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. 
Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such 
change by the Project Provinces and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM 
and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) 
the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective IEE and EMP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

3. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the ADB’s Category A environmental criteria as defined under the 
Safeguard Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that all
land and all rights-of-way required for each Subproject and all Project facilities are made 
available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related 
Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in 
compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land 
acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the 
REMDF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective REMDP, and any 
corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

5. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the Involuntary Resettlement Category A as defined under the 
Safeguard Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

6. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards,
the REMDF or the REMDP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to 
ensure , that no physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the 
Subprojects until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REMDP; and



17
Schedule 5

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REMDP.

Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable Groups

7. ' The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation and operation of the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous peoples; (b) 
the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; (c) the REMDF; and (d) all measures and requirements 
set forth in the respective REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
Subproject which meets the Indigenous Peoples Category A as defined under the Safeguard 
Policy Statement shall be financed under the Project.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

9. The Borrower shall make available and cause the Project Provinces to make
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the 
REMDPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and the REMDP (to the extent they 
concern impacts on affected people during construction), and any 
corrective or preventative actions set out in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the relevant Project Provinces with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation 
of the Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP or the 
REMDP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11. The Borrower shall do the following or shall cause the Project Provinces to do
the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;



18
Schedule 5

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts' 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP or the REMDP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP or the REMDP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

f 12. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that no
proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Gender and Development

13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that (a)
the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) adequate resources are allocated 
for implementation of the GAP; and (c) progress on implementation of the GAP, including 
progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored 
and reported to ADB.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

14. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the
core labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with 
during Project implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and 
incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do 
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced 
labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from using a legally permissible means of expressing 
their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of 
employment; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, 
information. on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the 
employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly 
monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with 
regular, reports.

Selection and Implementation of Subprojects

15. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Provinces to ensure that (a)
only Candidate Subprojects are considered for financing under the Project; (b) Candidate 
Subprojects in each Project Province are taken up in the order of priority as indicated in the 
PAM; (c) feasibility studies and detailed design for such Candidate Subprojects are carried 
out in accordance with the relevant provisions under the PAM; and (d) only Candidate 



19
Schedule 5

Subproject which meets feasibility criteria as provided in the PAM is financed as a Subproject 
under the Project.

Community Awareness and Beneficiary Participation

16. The Borrower shall ensure that Project Provinces promote active community
awareness and stakeholder participation in the design, implementation and performance 
monitoring of Subprojects, through (a) disseminating the nature of the proposed Works in 
open public forums, and (b) establishing a mechanism for public consultation during Project 
physical implementation activities.

Counterpart Support

17. The Borrower shall cause the Project Provinces to ensure that the counterpart
funding required for successful Project implementation is timely allocated and provided. The 
Borrower shall further cause the Project Provinces to adequately staff and equip their 
respective Project management offices.

18. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project
Provinces have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods 
and/or Consulting Services contract.

Operation and Maintenance of Project Facilities

19. The Borrower shall ensure that each of the Project Provinces shall (a) prepare
a maintenance management plan that includes estimates of the physical works and 
associated costs required for routine and periodic maintenance, as well as provisions for 
emergency repairs for the whole life of the Project facilities; (b) include the maintenance 
management plans in its annual budgets and provide adequate funds in a timely manner 
from provincial budgets to implement the maintenance management plan; and (c) establish 
mechanisms for the safe and proper use for each of the Project facilities in accordance with 
national regulations and practice, including, but not limited to, posting signs on roads and 
bridges of maximum weight limits, and as necessary alerting users of hazards or establishing 
physical barriers that prohibit vehicles above a certain size to pass.

Financial Management

20. The Borrower shall ensure that the financial management action plan as
agreed between the Project Provinces and ADB and included in the PAM is implemented in 
accordance with the agreed timeframe as indicated in the PAM, but in any case within one 
year of the Effective Date.

Governance and Anticorruption

21. The Borrower (a) acknowledges ADB's right to investigate, directly or through
its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practices relating to the 
Project; and (b) agrees to cooperate, and shall cause the Project Provinces, and all other 
offices of the Borrower, organizations and entities involved in implementing the Project to 
cooperate, fully with any such investigation and to extend all necessary assistance, including 
providing access to all relevant books and records, as may be necessary for the satisfactory 



20
Schedule 5

completion of any such investigation. In particular, the Borrower shall ensure that (a) periodic 
audits of the Project contractor’s activities related to fund withdrawals and settlements are 
carried out; (b) relevant provisions of ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to 
date) are included in all bidding documents for the Project; and (c) contracts financed under 
the Project include provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of Project Provinces, contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.


































































47381-005: Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program - Tranche 2


LOAN NUMBER 3625-SRI

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Mahaweli Water Security Investment Program - Tranche 2)

between

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 18 MAY 2018

SRI 47381



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 18 May 2018 between DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST 
REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) by a framework financing agreement dated 23 April 2015 between the 
Borrower and ADB, ADB has agreed to provide a multitranche financing facility to the 
Borrower for purposes of financing projects under the Mahaweli Water Security Investment 
Program;

(B) by a periodic financing request dated 2 October 2017, the Borrower 
has applied to ADB for (i) a loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources on concessional 
terms (“Concessional Loan”); and (ii) a loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources on regular 
terms (“Ordinary Operations Loan”); each for the purposes of the Project described in 
Schedule 1 to the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement (as defined 
hereafter);

(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith (“Ordinary Operations 
[Concessional] Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to lend to the Borrower from its ordinary 
operations resources an amount of thirty-one million Dollars ($31,000,000) for the purpose of 
the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations and the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan 
Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or the 
context otherwise requires.

ARTICLE II



The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred seventy-nine million Dollars 
($179,000,000), as such amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency 
Conversion in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 15 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR; and

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a
credit of 0,10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts 
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to 
this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt 
management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; 
and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 



outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in 
Section 2.01(6) of the Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in 
accordance with the provisions of Article V of the Loan Regulations 
and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the Ordinary 
Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where 
any such item has hot been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with 
those agreed between the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the 
contract are not satisfactory to ADB.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2022 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project 
in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 



terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes 
the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 
6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time 
reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan Agreement shall have been duly 
executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) 
shall have been fulfilled.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 10.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or 
opinions to be furnished to ADB: that the Ordinary Operations (Concessional) Loan 
Agreement has been duly authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, 
the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in accordance with its terms, subject 
only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.

Section 5.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of 
the Loan Regulations.



ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6.01. Each of the Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and 
Mass Media, Deputy Secretary to the Treasury and Director General of the Department of 
External Resources of the Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the 
purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Secretary
Ministry of Finance and Mass Media
Colombo 1
Sri Lanka

cc.: Deputy Secretary to the Treasury
Director General, Department of External Resources

Facsimile Numbers:

+94 11 243-3349
+9411 244-7633

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+63 2 636-2444
+63 2 636-2391.



IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC 
OF SRI LANKA

By__________________________
R.H.S. SAMARATUNGA 

Secretary
Ministry of Finance & Mass Media

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

SRI WIDOWATI
Country Director 

Sri Lanka Resident Mission



SCHEDULE 1

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, 
to which a Currency Conversion applies.

Payment Due Installment Share 
(Expressed as a %)


2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount 
of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be 
the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of 
this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as 
necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this 
Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion applies.

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any 
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal 
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal 
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of 
withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating 
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion 
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule 
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



SCHEDULE 2

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category 6 is for interest and commitment charges
on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and commitment charges.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if 
such reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, in consultation 
with the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other 
Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



Retroactive Financing

6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works, Consulting 
Services, and PMU and PIU operational costs, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 
20% of the Loan amount.



TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated for 
ADB Financing 

($)
Basis for Withdrawal 

from the Loan Account
Category Subcategory

1 Civil Works 140,470,000

1A UEC-ICB-2A 114,890,000 85% of total expenditure 
claimed

1B NWPC-ICB-1

•‘ili;:’ ;z
1
 y? 

I:« 

_■ 
51^!^;:

25,580,000 85% of total expenditure claimed

2 Environment Mitigation 820,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

3

Consulting Services 
(Project Management, 
Design and 
Supervision 
Consultant)

5,970,000 85% of total expenditure claimed

4 PMU and PIU Operation Costs 7,000,000
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

5 Equipment Operation Maintenance 5,660,000
81% of total expenditure 
claimed

6 Interest andCommitment Charges 17,240,000 100% of amounts due

7 Unallocated 1,840,000 feiiwS
TOTAL 179,000,000























































LOAN NUMBER 3570-CAM(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Tonle Sap Poverty Reduction and Smallholder Development Project - Additional Financing)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 9 JANUARY 2018

CAM 41435



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 9 January 2018 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a financing agreement dated 27 December 2009 between the 
Borrower and ADB (“ADB Financing Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a concessional 
loan from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in various currencies equivalent to two million one 
hundred thirty-two thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR2,132,000) and a grant in an amount 
of twenty-seven million three hundred thousand Dollars ($27,300,000), for the purpose of the 
project described in Schedule 1 to the ADB Financing Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a concessional loan from ADB’s 
ordinary capital resources, for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement (“Project”);

(C) the Borrower has also applied for a grant from ADB’s special funds 
resources in an amount equivalent to four million two hundred seventy-five thousand Dollars 
($4,275,000) (“ADF Grant”) and ADB has agreed to make the ADF Grant to the Borrower for 
the purposes of the Project pursuant to a grant agreement of even date herewith between the 
Borrower and ADB (“ADF Grant Agreement”);

(D) the Borrower has also applied to the International Fund for Agricultural 
Development (“IFAD”) for a loan (“IFAD Loan”), to be partially administered by ADB in an 
amount of ten million Dollars equivalent ($16,000,000) to assist in financing a part of the 
Project, pursuant to an agreement to be entered into between the Borrower and IFAD (the 
“IFAD Financing Agreement”);

(E) the Project shall be carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry 
and Fisheries (“MAFF”) and the National Committee for Sub-National Democratic 
Development Secretariat (“NCDDS”), and for this purpose the Borrower shall make available 
to MAFF and NCDDS the proceeds of the loan provided herein and the ADF Grant upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(F) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:



2

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following.meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(c) “DRM” means disaster risk management;

(d) “DRR” means disaster risk reduction;

(e) "Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB; „

(f) "Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means an environmental 
management plan for a Subproject,' including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project in 
consultation with the Borrower and approved by ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan and/or ADF Grant, including related services 
such as transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, 
and initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services; •

(j) “ICT” means information and communication technology;



3

(k) “Indigenous Peoples Plan” or “IPP” means the indigenous people plan 
for a Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements of the IPPF and cleared 
byADB;

(I) “Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework” or “IPPF” means the 
indigenous peoples planning framework for the Project, including any 
updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared 
byADB;

(m) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3 and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means an initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(o) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(p) “LIG” means a livelihood improvement group;

(q) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(r) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

(s) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 4 
August 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(t) “Participating Commune” means a participating commune located in 
one of the Participating Provinces included in the Project;

(u) “Participating Province” means a participating province included under 
the Projeqt;

(v) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Procurement Manual” means the Procurement Manual under the 
Standard Operating Procedures prepared by the Borrower and 
endorsed by ADB, which sets forth procurement-related policies and 
procedures for externally-financed projects and programs;

(x) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
4 August 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 



4

from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(y) “Project Executing Agency” for the purpose of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means each of MAFF and NCDDS, or any 
successors thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for carrying 
out the Project;

(z) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be improved, rehabilitated, 
modernized, constructed, and/or maintained, and the equipment to be 
installed and maintained under the Project;

(aa) “Resettlement Framework” or “RF” means the resettlement framework 
for the Project, including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(bb) “Resettlement Plan” or “RP” means the resettlement plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower pursuant to the requirements of the RF and cleared by 
ADB;

(cc) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(dd) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB, that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP, the RP and the IPP 
(as applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(ee) “Standard Operating Procedures” means the standard operating 
procedures of the Borrower dated 22 May 2012 (as amended from time 
to time) providing procedures applicable to all externally-financed 
projects and programs;

(ff) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject selection criteria set forth in herein and detailed in the PAM; 
and

(gg) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.



5

ARTICLE I!

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty-five million seven hundred twenty-five thousand 
Dollars ($45,725,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE 111

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.



6

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for.the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 July 2023 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agencies to (i) maintain separate accounts, and records for the Project; (ii) prepare 
consolidated annual financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually by 
independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such 
audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the 
financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds and the ADF Grant proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to enable 
ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the financial statements for the Project and the 
Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the. Project with the auditors appointed 
pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any representative 
of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that 
such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an authorized officer of the 
Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing 
Agencies to enable ADB’s representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and 
any relevant records and documents.



7

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation; 
and

(b) the IFAD Loan shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation 
or shall have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date.

Sec tion 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Sec tion 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: .

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement shall have been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower, and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness, other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, shall have been fulfilled; and

(b) the IFAD Financing Agreement shall have been duly authorized, 
executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness shall have been fulfilled..

Sec tion 6.02. The following are specified as .additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) th© ADF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) the IFAD Financing Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding up'on the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms, to the extent applicable.



8

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Sec tion 7.01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Sec tion 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

The Ministry of Economy and Finance
Street 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh, Phnom Penh
Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

(855-23) 427 798
(855-23) 428 424

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaiuyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2231.



9

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

By
H.E. Dr. AUN PORNMONIROTH 

Senior Minister
Minister, Ministry of Economy and 

Finance

PMENT BANKASIAN DEVE

By
SAMIUELA TUKUAFU 

Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



10

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase agricultural productivity, strengthen
climate and disaster resilience and improve access to markets in the Participating Communes 
in the Participating Provinces in the Tonle Sap Basin.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Output 1: Rural productive infrastructure and livelihood improved with
capacity in disaster risk management enhanced by:

(a) rehabilitating roads and upgrading irrigation infrastructure for at least 
two crops per year;

(b) strengthening existing LIGs and establishing additional LIGs in the 
Participating Communes and establishing aq LIG association to improve 
their sustainability; and

(c) strengthening of DRM in Participating Communes through training on 
identifying, planning and implementing DRR measures, including 
incorporation of DRR considerations in infrastructure Subprojects.

Out put 2: Enabling environment for increased agricultural productivity,
diversification and climate resilience created by:

(a) providing training on climate-smart agricultural practices through paddy 
selling groups, LIGs and market improvement groups;

(b) promoting the production of climate-resilient rice seed varieties upon 
confirmation of market demand; and

(c) improving value addition for rice, vegetables and chicken value chain 
through (i) establishing multi-stakeholder value chain platforms, (ii) 
establishing market improvement groups, (iii) strengthening existing 
small-scale agribusinesses; and (iv) establishing additional 
agribusinesses.

Out put 3: Project management strengthened by continuing support for-
Project staff at national, provincial, district and commune levels on Project 
management.

3. Consulting Services will be provided to support the above-stated activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 January 2023.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Financial charges during implementation -
Interest during construction” is for financing the interest charge on the Loan during the 
implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account 
and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when 
due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing Percentage and Basis for 

Withdrawal from the Loan 
Accounti

Category Subcategory

1 Works 30,243,000 ■

1A Works-ADB 30,243,000 93% of total expenditure claimed

2 Livelihood inputs 2,118,000

2A Revolving fund J 225,000 5% of total expenditure claimed*

2B
Other livelihood inputs - 
ADB

1,893,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

3 Goods and services 2,660,000

3B
Goods and services - 
ADB

2,660,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

4
Capacity development 
and training

2,111,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

5 Consulting Services 5,445,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

6 Recurrent costs 2,238,000

6B Operations and 
maintenance

/ 2,238,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

7

Financial charges 
during implementation -
Interest during 
construction

910,000 100% of amount due

TOTAL 45,725,000

*Exclustve of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



15

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
Other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works  procured on the basis of the procurement methodsshall.be
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding; and

(c) Shopping.

Domestic Preference

5. The Borrower may grant a margin of preference in the evaluation of bids under
international competitive bidding in accordance with paragraphs 2.55(a) and 2.56 of the 
Procurement Guidelines for domestically manufactured Goods and paragraphs 2.55(b) and 
2.56 of the Procurement Guidelines for domestic Works. -

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



16

Schedule 4

Community Participation in Procurement ' ,

7. The Borrower may use community participation in procurement for operation
and maintenance for infrastructure in accordance with agreed procedures set out in the 
Procurement Plan.

Conditions for Award of Contract

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject:

(a) involving environmental impacts, until (i) each Project Executing Agency 
has prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final IEE for an 
applicable Subproject pursuant to the EARF and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such IEE; (ii) the Ministry of Environment has granted the 
final approval of each relevant IEE, if it is required by Sub-decree 72 
ANRK.BK on Environment Impact Assessment Process; and (iii) each 
Project Executing Agency has incorporated the relevant provisions from 
each relevant EMP into the Works contract for Category "B" Subprojects 
and the Project Environmental Code of Conduct for Category "C" 
Subprojects;

(b) involving involuntary resettlement impacts, until the Borrower has 
prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final RP based on the RF 
and Subproject's detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of such 
RP; and

(c) involving indigenous peoples impacts, until each Project Executing 
Agency has prepared and submitted to ADB each relevant final IPP 
based on the IPPF and obtained ADB's clearance of such IPP.

Consulting Services

9. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

10. The Borrower may apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Single Source Selection for Project implementation consultants.

11. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants in accordance with
procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

12. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe, any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.



17

Schedule 4

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

13. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

14. All draft contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures,
first draft contract procured under national competitive bidding procedures, first contracts 
procured under community participation for operations and maintenance and first draft contract 
procured under shopping and all draft contracts for‘Consulting Services shall be subject to 
prior review by ADB, unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in 
the Procurement Plan.



18

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Counterpart Support and Q&M

2. The Borrower shall ensure that adequate counterpart funds for the Project are
provided on a timely basis. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the 
Project Executing Agencies have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any 
Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract.

3. The Borrower shall ensure the release of adequate funds to support the O&M
of irrigation schemes underThe Project and ensure that the irrigation is registered on the 
Borrower’s Information System on Irrigation Schemes to ensure eligibility for any government 
O&M funding. Additionally, the Borrower shall ensure that the roads are included in the 
Ministry of Rural Development inventory to ensure eligibility for any government O&M funding.

Subproject Eligibility and Selection Criteria

4. The Borrower shall ensure or shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to
ensure that all Subprojects are selected and implemented in accordance with the screening 
and eligibility criteria as agreed with ADB and set forth in Appendix 3 to the PAM.

Safeguards - Environment

5. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of 
the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the applicable 
Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the respective IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for environment as defined in the SPS is financed under 
the Project.

Safeguards - Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that all land and all rights-of-way required for the Project, each Subproject and all Project 
facilities are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 



19

Schedule 5

under the related Works contract and that all land acquisition and resettlement activities are 
implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of Borrower relating to 
land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the 
RF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective RP, and any corrective 
or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

8. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
RF or any RP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure 
that no physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project or a 
Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP.

9. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for involuntary resettlement as defined in the SPS is 
financed under the Project.

Safeguards - Ethnic Minorities

10. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of the Project, each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to ethnic minorities or indigenous peoples; (b) the Indigenous Peoples 
Safeguards; (c) the IPPF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective 
IPP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

11. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no Subproject with Category A for indigenous people or ethnic minorities under the SPS 
is financed under the Project

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. The Borrower shall make available or cause the Project Executing Agencies to
make available, necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EARF, the 
RF, the IPPF, each EMP, each RP and each IPP (if any).

Safeguards-related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that all bidding documents arid contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors 
to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE, 
the EMP, the RP and the IPP, if any (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 



20

Schedule 5

preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Project Executing Agencies with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP or the 
IPP (if any);

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-Project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Borrower shall do, or cause the Project Executing Agencies to do the
following:

(a) submit social safeguards monitoring reports to ADB as part of the 
quarterly and annual progress reports, and environmental safeguards 
monitoring reports semiannually in January and July each year and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP or the IPP (if any), promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP, the RP or the IPP (if any) 
promptly after becoming aware of the breach.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

15. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism acceptable, to ADB is established in 
accordance with the provisions of the relevant EARF, EMP, RF, RP (if any), IPPF or IPP (if 
any), within the timeframes specified in the relevant documents, to consider safeguards 
complaints.



21

Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

16. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that no proceeds of the Loan and ADF Grant are used to finance any activity included in the 
list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

17. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the'Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that the core labor standards and the Borrower's applicable laws and regulations are complied 
with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall or cause the Project Executing 
Agencies to include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB-under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect 
of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from 
developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their 
rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) disseminate, or engage 
appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and 
to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

18, The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agencies to strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 17 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports as part of the quarterly and annual progress reports.

Gender and Development

19. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agencies to ensure
that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and 
contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in 
the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include, but not limited to: (i) at least one women to be elected to join each 
management committee of the new LIGs and service teams, (ii) at least 25% of unskilled 
workers employed are women, (iii) at least 60% of rural loans are taken by women, (iv) 
commune councilors from selected target communes have received training on gehder- 
responsive DRM, (v) at least 200 agribusiness enterprises (30% owned by women) such as 
chick production and feed production are operational, and (vi) at least 40% of market 
improvement group and paddy selling group members are women.

Governance and Anticorruption

20. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall (a) comply with ADB's
Anti corrupt ion Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.



22

Schedule 5

21. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and'accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. ,

22. The Borrower and the Project Executing Agencies shall disclose, through the
Project website, accessible by general public, information about various matters concerning 
the Project, including general project information, procurement, project progress, and contact 
details in the English and Cambodian languages, as applicable. The Project website shall also 
provide a link to ADB’s integrity office for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations of 
corrupt practices arising out of the Project and its activities. With regard to procurement, the 
website shall include: (a) the list of participating bidders; (b) the name of the winning bidder; 
(c) the amount of the contracts awarded; (d) basic details on bidding procedures adopted; and 
(e) the list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services procured.




































































51081-002: Climate Change and Disaster-Resilient Water Resources Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3746-KGZ(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Climate Change and Disaster-Resilient Water Resources Sector Project)

between

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED

KGZ 51081



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated //^^^^Z f̂eetween KYRGYZ REPUBLIC 

(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the purposes 
of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“Grant 
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s Special Funds 
resources ("Grant”) in the amount of sixteen million eight hundred thousand Dollars 
($16,800,000) for the purposes of the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant;

(b) “Disaster Risk Management Component” means that component of the 
Project described in paragraph 2(c) of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(c) "DWR” means the Department of Water Resources and Melioration 
under the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Industry and Melioration of the 
Borrower, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;



2

(d) “EARF" means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(e) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for a Subproject, or, 
as may be required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including 
any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(g) “Goods" means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(h) “Hydrometeorology Installation Works" means Works to install any 
hydrological and/or meteorological equipment under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project, including any Works to install 
the hydrological posts referred to in paragraph 2(c) of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(i) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for a Subproject, or, 
as may be required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant 
to the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(j) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(k) "Irrigation Infrastructure Component" means that component of the 
Project described in paragraph 2(a) of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(I) “KyrgyzHydromet” means the Agency for Hydrometeorology under the 
Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Borrower, or any successor 
thereto;

(m) "Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(n) “MOES" means the Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Borrower, 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(o) “Nonconsulting Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant;

(p) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;



3

(q) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 19 
October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(r) “PIU” means the Project implementation unit to be established within 
DWR to assist with the execution of the Project;

(s) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
19 October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time In accordance with the Procurement Policy, 
the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(t) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(u) "Procurement Regulations" means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(v) "Project Executing Agency" for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations (as this term is 
defined in the Grant Agreement) means DWR and MOES, both 
individually and collectively, or any successor to either of them 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(w) "Project facilities" means the irrigation infrastructure to be protected, 
modernized and provided, and the equipment to be installed, piloted and 
provided, under the project;

(x) “RF" means the resettlement framework for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(y) “RP” means the resettlement plan for a Subproject, or, as may be 
required, for Hydrometeorology Installation Works, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the RF and cleared by ADB;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP and the RP (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(aa) "Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(bb) "SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);



4

(cc) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Irrigation Infrastructure 
Component of the Project that meets the subproject eligibility criteria set 
forth in the PAM;

(dd) “Works" means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services and project related 
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey 
contract; and

(ee) “WUA" means a water user association or union of water user 
associations established and operating under the Law of the Kyrgyz 
Republic on “Unions (Associations) of Water Users and Unions of Water 
User Associations" adopted by the Parliament of the Kyrgyz Republic 
on 8 February 2002 and signed by the President of the Kyrgyz Republic 
on 15 March 2002, as such law may be amended from time to time.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of twenty-one million eight hundred thousand Dollars 
($21,800,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the Items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.

Section 3. 05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2025 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 4. 02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 



6

were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, the Works and the Services, and any relevant records and 
documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the Grant Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the execution and delivery of the Grant Agreement on behalf of the Borrower 
have been duly authorized or ratified by all necessary governmental action.

Section 6. 02, The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 



7

to be furnished to ADB: that the Grant Agreement has been duly authorized or ratified by, and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in 
accordance with Its terms, subject only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement,

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
58 Erklndik Boulevard
Bishkek 720040
Kyrgyz Republic

Facsimile Number:

(996) 312 661 645

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632)636-2424.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

Authorized Representative

CountryJOirector
Kyrgyz Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is improved climate change and disaster resilience
of infrastructure and water security.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) the protection and modernization of irrigation infrastructure to improve 
the productivity of approximately 20,000 hectares of irrigated land, 
including by upgrading and constructing main (primary and secondary) 
canals, lower-level (Intra-farm and on-farm) canals, and associated 
infrastructure such as protective mudflow crossing structures, cross­
regulators and offtakes;

(b) the enhancement of (i) irrigation system management, including by 
developing and Implementing joint DWR-WUA irrigation system 
management plans with, among others, water delivery scheduling and 
O&M financing and planning; and (ii) agricultural land management, 
including by developing WUA on-farm water management and 
agricultural management plans with, among others, irrigation 
scheduling, cropping patterns, and cultural methods, and providing 
capacity building for farmers and community members; and

(c) the improvement of national disaster risk management capacity, 
including by providing heavy machinery and special equipment for 
preventative and rehabilitation works at the Northern and Southern 
Emergency Response Centers of MOES; enhancing the asset 
management of such centers; providing capacity building for disaster 
risk management, including project planning; installing hydrological 
posts for KyrgyzHydromet in approximately 20 sites; and piloting an 
information system for enhanced data collection, processing and flood 
warning.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2025,

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”), (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to the Category "Interest Charge" is for financing the
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
Insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($)
Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1
DWR - Civil Works (Off-farm 
Canal and Ancillary); Equipment & 
Machinery; O&M; and Services

10,390,973
76.86% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2
MOES - Civil Works; Equipment 
& Machinery; O&M; and Services

10,559,541 76.86% of total expenditure 
claimed*

3 Interest during Implementation 849,486 100% of amounts due

TOTAL 21,800,000

* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



14

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth In the PAM and its 
appendices. Any subsequent change to the PAM or its appendices shall become effective only 
after the approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy 
between the PAM or its appendices on the one hand, and this Loan Agreement or the Grant 
Agreement on the other, the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Grant Agreement shall 
prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements; the Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (I) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower, through DWR, shall not award any Works contract for a
Subproject which involves environmental impacts until DWR has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the State Agency of 
Environmental Protection and Forestry of the Borrower; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.



15
Schedule 4

This paragraph 3 shall apply similarly to MOES for all Hydrometeorology Installation Works 
that are covered by an IEE and EMP.

4. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final RP for such Subproject based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such RP. This paragraph 4 shall apply similarly to all Hydrometeorology 
Installation Works that are covered by an RP.

Environment

5. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the preparation,
design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project, each 
Subproject, all Hydrometeorology Installation Works, and all Project facilities comply with (a) 
all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; 
(b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set 
forth in the respective IEE and EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

6. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that all land and all rights-
of-way required for the Project, each Subproject, all Hydrometeorology Installation Works, and 
all Project facilities are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule 
agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities 
are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguards; (c) the RF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in the respective RP, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

7. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
RF or any RP, the Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with any Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP for the Subproject; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP for the Subproject.

This paragraph 7 shall apply similarly to all Hydrometeorology Installation Works that are 
covered by an RP.

Indigenous Peoples

8. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the Project does not
have any indigenous peoples impact within the meaning of the SPS. In the event that the 
Project does have any such impact, the Borrower, through DWR and/or MOES (as the case 
may be), shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.



16
Schedule 4

Human and Financial Resources to Implemerit Safeguards Requirements

9. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the RPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the relevant IEE, EMP and RP (to the extent they concern 
impacts on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set out in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental or resettlement risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Subproject or 
Hydrometeorological Installation Works (as the case may be) that were 
not considered In the relevant IEE, EMP or RP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-Project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of any Subproject or 
Hydrometeorological Installation Works that were not considered in the 
relevant IEE, EMP or RP, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of 
such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan; and



17
Schedule 4

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in an EMP or RP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

12. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan or Grant are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment 
activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall Include specific provisions in 
the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the 
contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and 
regulations and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use 
child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do 
not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to 
collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to 
disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

14. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall strictly monitor compliance with
the requirements set forth in paragraph 13 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

15. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB

Counterpart Support

16. The Borrower shall make available all counterpart funds required for the timely
and effective implementation of the Project, including for any shortfall of funds or cost overrun, 
through providing annual budget allocations and releasing applicable funds In a timely manner. 
In addition, the Borrower shall provide all necessary support to DWR and MOES and ensure 
that DWR and MOES have sufficient funds to satisfy all liabilities arising from any Works, 
Goods and/or Services contract under the Project.

Operational Covenants - DWR

17. The Borrower, through DWR, shall appraise and select all Subprojects in
accordance with the criteria and procedures set out in the PAM. The Borrower, through DWR, 



18
Schedule 4

shall ensure that the selection of sites for the feasibility study of potential Subprojects, and the 
selection of sites for the implementation of selected Subprojects, are undertaken in accordance 
with criteria and procedures agreed upon between DWR and ADB as set out in the PAM and 
its appendices.

18. The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that each Subproject is implemented
in accordance with applicable design and technical specifications and construction norms 
satisfactory to ADB, and construction supervision, quality control and contract management 
are performed in accordance with best international industry practice, The Borrower, through 
DWR, shall ensure that the detailed design of each Subproject incorporates the findings of the 
climate risk assessment that was undertaken as part of the feasibility study of the Subproject.

19. (a) The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that all Project facilities are
operated and maintained, in an effective and sustainable manner, in accordance with the 
applicable laws, regulations and standards of the Borrower and, in other respects not covered 
by such laws, regulations and standards, in accordance with best international industry 
practice.

(b) The Borrower, through DWR, shall timely develop, approve, adopt and 
implement a joint WUA-DWR sustainable O&M plan for each irrigation infrastructure to be 
protected and modernized under the Project. As set out in the PAM and its appendices, each 
such plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, (i) a water delivery schedule and (ii) an asset 
management plan including an O&M budget and cost sharing. The Borrower, through DWR, 
shall ensure that budgetary and other resources are allocated timely and provided promptly as 
necessary for the O&M of each irrigation infrastructure to be protected and modernized under 
the Project, and, at any given time, the amount of such budgetary and other resources shall 
not be less than the total sum required, at that time, to cover the O&M expenditures indicated 
in the O&M budget referred to in this sub-paragraph (b).

(c) The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure the timely development and 
implementation of agriculture and on-farm water management plans under the Project. As set 
out in the PAM and its appendices, each such plan shall include, but shall not be limited to, (I) 
cropping patterns including introduction and diversification of crops and (ii) irrigation methods 
and scheduling. The Borrower, through DWR, shall ensure that each such plan shall be 
endorsed by the Council (established and operating under the applicable laws and regulations 
of the Borrower on WUAs) managing the WUA that will be implementing the plan.

Operational Covenants - MOES

20. (a) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all equipment and
information systems installed, piloted or provided under the Disaster Risk Management 
Component of the Project are operated and maintained appropriately and In accordance with 
the standards and requirements prescribed by the applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower, and adequate budgetary and other resources are promptly provided for such O&M. 
The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that adequate, appropriate and timely 
arrangements and resources are in place for the preventive and standard maintenance of the 
said equipment and information systems after their warranty periods expire. The Borrower, 
through MOES, shall timely develop and implement sustainable asset management and 
maintenance plans for the heavy equipment to be provided to the Northern and Southern 
Emergency Response Centers of MOES.



19
Schedule 4

(b) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all MOES divisions, 
offices and units, including MOES associated entities and centers, that receive and operate 
the equipment and information systems installed, piloted or provided under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project are adequately staffed with personnel who have been 
fully trained, in accordance with the requirements of and as otherwise contemplated by the 
PAM, to operate and maintain them.

(c) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all heavy machinery 
and associated equipment provided under the Disaster Risk Management Component of the 
Project is used only by MOES, or a government agency duly authorized by MOES, and only 
for the purpose of preventative and recovery works related to disaster risk management, 
including the maintenance of structures provided under the Project to protect irrigation 
infrastructure from flood and mudflow. The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that such 
equipment is not leased or otherwise permitted to be used by any third party for any 
construction or other commercial activity.

(d) The Borrower, through MOES, shall ensure that all hydrological and/or 
meteorological equipment and information systems provided under the Disaster Risk 
Management Component of the Project are, in accordance with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower, transferred and/or made available for use by KyrgyzHydromet 
promptly after their provision.

Governance and Anticorruption

21. The Borrower, DWR and MOES shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption
Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

22. The Borrower, DWR and MOES shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

23. The Borrower, through DWR and MOES, shall provide updated Information on
the Project on their websites, including information on performance, business opportunities, 
bidding process and guidelines, outcome of biddings, and summary progress reports.






















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3745-VIE(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Water Efficiency Improvement in Drought-Affected Provinces Project)

between

SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM

and 

J . i 4

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED Zf

VIE 49404



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated MW between SOCIALIST
REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development (“MARD”) and the following provincial peoples’ committees: Binh 
Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Lak Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong 
Provincial People’s Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s Committee and Ninh Thuan 
Provincial People’s Committee (“Participating PPCs”), and for this purpose the Borrower will 
make available to the Participating PPCs the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon 
terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“CCF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a grant from its Climate Change 
Fund ("CCF Grant’’) in an amount of three hundred thousand Dollars ($300,000) for the 
Project;

(D) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("NTF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to administer a grant provided by the 
Netherlands Trust Fund (“NTF Grant’’, and collectively with the CCF Grant, the “Grants”) 
under the Water Financing Partnership Facility in an amount of seven hundred fifty thousand 
Dollars ($750,000) for the purposes of the Project; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement dated 2? December 2018 between ADB and the Participating 
PPCs;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject however, to the following modifications:



2

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement” means the project agreement of even date 
herewith between ADB, and the Binh Thuan Provincial People’s 
Committee, Dak Lak Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong 
Provincial People’s Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s 
Committee and Ninh Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, as such 
agreement may be amended from time to time; and such project 
agreement includes all schedules to the project agreement;

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency” appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall include the Binh Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Lak 
Provincial People’s Committee, Dak Nong Provincial People’s 
Committee, Khanh Hoa Provincial People’s Committee and Ninh 
Thuan Provincial People’s Committee, as context requires.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants as described in paragraph 3 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(c) “EA" (or “Project Executing Agency”) for the purposes of, and within 
the meaning of, the Loan Regulations means MARD, and the 
Participating PPCs or any successors thereto acceptable to ADB, 
which are responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

(d) “EMP" means each environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards’’ means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the SPS;

(f) “Ethnic Minorities Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the SPS;

(g) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;



3

(h) “Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(i) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(j) “IEE” means each initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(k) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(I) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(m) “MARD” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development, or any successor thereto;

(n) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
30 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through MARD, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
respective administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(o) “Participating PPCs” means all and any of the provincial peoples’ 
committees of Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa and Ninh 
Thuan, or any successor thereto, which are responsible for the 
carrying out of their respective Subprojects under the Project;

(p) “Procurement Guidelines" means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(q) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
30 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through MARD, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(r) “REMDP” means the resettlement and ethnic minorities development 
plan, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by each 
Participating PPC for relevant Subprojects (if required) under the 
Project and cleared by ADB;

(s) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower, through MARD, to ADB that describes 
progress with implementation of and compliance with the EMP, the RP 
and the IPP (as applicable), including any corrective and preventative 
actions;



4

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Subproject" means a part or component under the Project that is
carried out by the corresponding Participating PPC and described in 
greater detail in the PAM;

(v) “Subsidiary Loan Agreement” means the agreement(s) between the 
Borrower and the Participating PPCs, as described in Section 3.01 of 
this Loan Agreement; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 April and 15 October in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall provide the proceeds of the
Loan to the Participating PPCs through (i) budgetary grant transfers; and (ii) relending to the 
Participating PPCs under Subsidiary Loan Agreements upon terms and conditions 
satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2026 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Participating PPCs to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreements in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower 
and ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.



6

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreements shall 
be assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the CCF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than 
a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall 
have been fulfilled; and

(b) the NTF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than 
a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall 
have been fulfilled.

Section 5. 02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated 
as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
No. 28 Tran Hung Dao Street
Hoan Kiem District
Ha Noi, Viet Nam

Facsimile Number:

(84-4) 2220-8020



7

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines
Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632) 636-2231.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

DINH TIEN DUNG
Minister

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

ERIC SIDGWICK
Country Director

Viet Nam Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to establish climate-resilient and modernized
irrigation systems in the provinces of Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Khanh Hoa and Ninh 
Thuan.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) Strengthening of irrigation management services, which includes 
support to:

(i) irrigation water allocation and delivery services; and

(ii) maintenance of irrigation systems;

(b) Modernizing 8 irrigation Subprojects to provide water on-demand to 
farmers cultivating high value crops;

(c) Adopting efficient "on-farm" water management practices, which 
includes:

(i) providing farmers with information and training on best 
irrigation practices to improve their water productivity; and

(ii) providing farmers with technical advice on identifying and 
developing appropriate micro irrigation systems that meet their 
individual requirements.

3. The Project includes provision of Consulting Services, as detailed in the PAM.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2025.

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for project expenditures under a Subproject until the 
Borrower has furnished to ADB a written confirmation that the respective Participating PPC 
had executed a Subsidiary Loan Agreement(s) on terms and conditions consistent with this 
Loan Agreement. For avoidance of doubt, this withdrawal condition applies individually and 
severally to each Participating PPC.



11

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Binh Thuan Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

17,826,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

2 Ninh Thuan Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

29,495,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

3 Khanh Hoa Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

15,113,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

4 Dak Nong Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services)*

17,641,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

5 Dak Lak Province 
(Works, Goods, 
Consulting Services, 
Project Administration)*

19,925,000 100% of total expenditure claimed**

TOTAL 100,000,000

*Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3.
**Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.



12

SCHEDULE 4 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured
and Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Eligible Source of Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

4. Goods, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the
Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding; and

(b) National Competitive Bidding.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not, and shall ensure that each Participating PPC does
not, award any Works contract which involves environmental impacts until:

(a) ADB has granted the final approval of the updated EMP, which is 
prepared based on the relevant Subproject’s detailed design; and



13

Schedule 4

(b) the Participating PPC has incorporated the relevant provisions from 
the updated EMP into the relevant Works contract

8. The Borrower shall not, and shall ensure that each Participating PPC does
not, award any Works contract which involves land acquisition and/or involuntary 
resettlement impacts, and/or impacts on ethnic minorities, until the relevant Participating 
PPC has prepared and submitted to ADB the final REMDP based on the relevant 
Subproject’s detailed design, and obtained ADB’s clearance of such REMDP.

Consulting Services

9. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

10. The Borrower shall apply the following selection methods for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan:

(a) Fixed Budget Selection;

(b) Consultants’ Qualifications Selection; and

(c) Single Source Selection.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

11. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

12. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

13. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



14

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall ensure that the Project is
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the lEEs, the EMPs, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

3. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that
their respective Subprojects are carried out in accordance with environmental assessment 
procedures provided in the lEEs as agreed between MARD and ADB.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

4. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that all
land and all rights-of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor 
in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land 
acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
(b) the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth 
in the REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in the Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

5. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
the REMDP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that no 
physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the REMDP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the REMDP.

Ethnic Minorities

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of the Project and all Project 



15

Schedule 5

facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to ethnic 
minorities; (b) the Ethnic Minorities Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set 
forth in the REMDP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

7. The Borrower shall make available or cause the Participating PPCs to make
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the 
REMDP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Participating PPCs to ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the 
lEEs, the EMPs and the REMDP (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts 
that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the 
Project that were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs and the 
REMDP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

9. The Borrower shall do the following or cause the Participating PPCs to do the
following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs and the REMDP, 



16

Schedule 5

promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with 
detailed description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; 
and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMPs and the REMDP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

10. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of 
the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower's applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the 
workers from developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and 
protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) 
disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks 
of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

12. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 11 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

13. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance
with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for 
contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are 
allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, 
including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly 
monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and output targets include: (i) 
equality of project benefits and opportunity-sharing between men and women; (ii) reduction in 
gender inequalities and social risks (HIV/AIDS transmission prevention, human trafficking 
prevention during construction of works); (Hi) training of women (including those from ethnic 
minorities) on micro irrigation and in overall system management and operations; (iv) 
increased representation of women in decision-making bodies; and (v) collection of sex- 
disaggregated data for benefit monitoring and evaluation.



17

Schedule 5

Operations and Maintenance

14. The Borrower shall cause each of the Participating PPCs to (a) adopt a tariff
structure in accordance with the Borrower’s appropriate regulations, whereby the tariffs are 
set at levels as to enable each Participating PPC, at a minimum, to fully recover Its respective 
operations and maintenance costs; and (b) launch its implementation in the Project financed 
irrigation schemes.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower, through the Participating PPCs, shall make available, promptly
as and when needed, the funds, facilities, services, land, and other resources as shall be 
necessary or required, in addition to the proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the 
Project and for the operation and maintenance of the Project facilities. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB, promptly at its reasonable request, evidence satisfactory to ADB that such 
funds, facilities, services, land and other resources are available for purposes related to the 
Project. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Participating PPCs 
have followed applicable procedures to budget for, and have obtained sufficient funds to 
satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

16. Within 12 months from the date of the Effective Date, each Participating PPC
shall ensure that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism in accordance with the 
provisions of the lEEs and the Participating PPC’s corresponding REMDP, and acceptable to 
ADB, is established. The grievance redress mechanism shall be translated to the local 
dialect and disclose in a place that are accessible to the local communities to make them 
aware of the grievance mechanism and their potential involvement and responsibilities in the 
project activities. The grievance redress mechanism shall include the names of the focal 
persons in the provincial project management units and the procedures for submitting 
complaints.

Governance and Anticorruption

17. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18. The Borrower and the Participating PPCs shall ensure that the anticorruption
provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other 
service providers as they relate to the Project.

19. The Borrower shall disclose, through the websites of the Participating PPCs,
information about various matters concerning the Project, including general project 
information, procurement, Project progress, and contact details in the English and 



18

Schedule 5

Vietnamese languages. The website will also provide a link to ADB’s Office of Anticorruption 
and Integrity (http://www.adb.org/site/integrity/main) for reporting to ADB any grievances or 
allegations of corrupt practices arising out of the Project and Project activities. With regard to 
procurement, the website will include information on the list of participating bidders, name of 
the winning bidder, basic details on bidding procedures adopted, amount of contract 
awarded, and the list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services procured.






















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3737-UZB(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Horticulture Value Chain Infrastructure Project) 

between

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED MAY 2019

UZB 51041



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated May 2019 between REPUBLIC OF
UZBEKISTAN (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by AIFSA (as hereinafter defined), and for 
this purpose the Borrower will make available to AIFSA the proceeds of the loan provided for 
herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and the Borrower; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement to be entered into between ADB and the ALC Management Company (as 
hereinafter defined);

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement” means the project agreement between ADB and 
ALC Management Company, as such agreement may be amended from 
time to time; and such project agreement includes all schedules to the 
project agreement; and

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency” appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the term “ALC Management Company”.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “AIFSA” means the Agency for Implementation of. Projects in the Field, 
of Agro-industry and Food Security of the Borrower, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;

(b) “ALCs” means the agro-logistic centers to be established under the 
Project in Andijian and Samarkand regions of the Borrower; and “ALC” 
means either of them;

(c) “ALC Management Company" means a special purpose vehicle to be 
established as a limited liability company to operate and manage the 
ALCs, which shall be fully owned by the Borrower;

(d) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(e) "Consulting Services" means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(f) “EMP” means an environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the respective IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(i) “Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, 
but excluding Consulting Services; .

(j) “iee” means an initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(k) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(I) “LARP” means a land acquisition and resettlement plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(m) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);



3

(n) “MlFT” means the Ministry of Investment and Foreign Trade of the 
Borrower, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(o) “Output” means an output of the Project;

(p) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 11 
October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through AIFSA, and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(q) “Procurement Guidelines" means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the'Project dated 
11 October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through AIFSA, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(s) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means AIFSA or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(t) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMPs and the LARPs, 
including any corrective and preventative actions;

(u) “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009); and

(v) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred ninety-seven million Dollars 
($197,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.



4

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall make the proceeds of the Loan 
available to AIFSA upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and the Borrower and shall 
cause AIFSA to apply such proceeds exclusively to the financing ofexpendituresonthe Project 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries of 
ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible 
sources for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works and Consulting Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. (a) The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to (i) maintain
separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the 
Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (Hi) have such 
financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, 
experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a 
report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the 
Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control 
of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no 
later than six months after the close of the fiscal year to which they relate, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, 
to discuss the financial statements for the Project and AIFSA’s financial affairs where they 
relate to the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, 
and shall authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only 
in the presence of an authorized officer of AIFSA, unless AIFSA shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the ALC Management Company to perform its obligations under 
the Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.



6

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Delegation of Authority

Section 6.01. The Borrower hereby designates AIFSA as its agent for 
the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or permitted under 
Sections 3.02, 3.03 and 3.05 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02, 5.03 and 
5.04 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by 
AIFSA pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 6.01 of this Loan Agreement shall.be 
fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if taken by the 
Borrower.

Section 6.03. The authority conferred on AIFSA under Section 6.01 of 
this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the Borrower and 
ADB.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
29 Istiqlol Street
Tashkent 100008
Republic of Uzbekistan



7

Facsimile Numbers:

(998-71)239-1128 
(998-71)239-1252.

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(63-2) 636-2444 
(63-2)636-2017.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

ELYAR GANIEV 
Deputy Prime Minister

Vice President (Operations 1)



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase the production and value addition of
horticulture products in the territory of the Borrower.

2. The Project shall comprise the following Outputs:

(a) Output 1: Establishment of ALCs. This Output comprises:

(i) the establishment of an ALC in Andijan region with (A) 
approximately 25,000 square meters (m2) of trading area split 
evenly between wholesale and small farmer sales areas with an 
annual throughput of approximately 425,000 tons; (B) 
approximately 60,000 cubic meters (m3) of cold storage with an 
annual capacity of approximately up to 1.5 million tons; (C) 
approximately 12 processing lines with an approximate annual 
throughput of 600,000 tons for export and 80,000 tons for the 
domestic market; and (D) groundworks for future expansion of 
the ALC for an increased volume of horticulture produce and/or 
trading, storage and processing of alternative food products; and

(ii) the establishment of an ALC in Samarkand with: (A) 
approximately 35,600 m2 of trading area split evenly between 
wholesale and small farmer sales areas with an annual 
throughput of approximately 550,000 tons; (B) approximately 
60,000 m3 of cold storage with an annual capacity of 
approximately up to 1.5 million tons; (C) approximately 17 
processing lines with an approximate annual throughput of 
850,000 tons for export and 150,000 tons for the domestic 
market; and (D) groundworks for future expansion of the ALC for 
an increased volume of horticulture produce and/or trading, 
storage and processing of alternative food products.

(b) Output 2: Improvement of ALC Management Capacity. This Output 
comprises the development of institutional and operational capacity of 
various stakeholders in the horticulture value chain, including the 
assistance to MIFT in (i) establishing the ALC Management Company 
in accordance with best international practices; (ii) preparing operation 
and management guidelines for the ALCs; (iii) conducting training in 
management, operation, and maintenance of the ALCs; (iv) conducting 
training in horticulture business development and management; and (v) 
learning from successful international agro-logistic models.

3. The Project shall include the provision of Consulting Services for activities,
including those specified in paragraph 2(b) above.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2023.



10

• * The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.

The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Payment Due Payment of Principal 
expressed in US Dollars*

15 May 2042
15 November 2042
15 May 2043
15 November 2043

4,925,000
4,925,000
4,925,000
4,925,000

Total 197,000,000



12

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures; and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all. agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Conditions for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawal
shall be made from the Loan Account in respect of Goods and Works (Turnkey Contract) until:

(a) the ALC Management Company has been duly established and is 
adequately staffed and fully operational in accordance with the laws of 
the Borrower;



13
Schedule 3

(b) the ALC Management Company has entered into the Project Agreement 
with ADB upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(c) ADB has received a satisfactory legal opinion confirming that the Project 
Agreement referred to in paragraph 5(b) above has been duly 
authorized by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, and is legally 
binding upon the ALC Management Company in accordance with its 
terms.



14
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
** Subject to the conditions of withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3.

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

$ 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1 Goods and Works 
(Turnkey Contract) ** 187,119,707

100% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2

Other Expenditures, 
including for:
(a) Project Management 

and Supervision 
Consultants;

(b) Project Management;
(c) Resettlement;
(d) Project Financial 

Audit; and
(e) Environmental 

Management

9,880,293 100% of total expenditure 
claimed

TOTAL 197,000,000



15

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding; and

(b) Shopping.

Conditions for Award of Contract

5. The Borrower shall not award and shall cause AIFSA not to award any Works
contract which involves environmental impacts until:

(a) the relevant environmental authority of the Borrower has granted the 
final approval of the applicable I EE; and

(b) AIFSA has incorporated the relevant provisions from the applicable 
EMP into the Works contract.

6. The Borrower shall not and shall cause AIFSA not to award any Works contract
which involves involuntary resettlement impacts, until AIFSA has prepared and submitted to 
ADB the final LARPs based on the Project's detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of 
such LARPs.

Consulting Services

7. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.



16
Schedule 4

8. The Borrower shall apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Least-Cost Selection for financial auditing.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

9. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

10. The Borrower shall ensure that ail ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB's Review of Procurement Decisions

11. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.

12. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s prior
review, the Borrower shall seek ADB’s prior approval of any modification or waiver of the terms 
and conditions of the contract, including:

(a) granting an extension of the stipulated time for completion of a contract 
for a period of one month or more, or which is likely to require an 
extension of the Loan Closing Date, and

(b) increases in aggregate of the original price by more than 5% (for the 
avoidance of doubt, such increase shall take into account any previous 
change under such contract).

13. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s post
review, ADB shall review the required contract modification or waiver and respond to the 
Borrower as soon as practicable, but not later than one month after the receipt of the required 
document.

14. The Borrower shall provide to ADB copies of all time extensions, modifications
or waivers to the contracts (including change orders) within one month following amendment 
of the contract.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and AIFSA shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower, through 
AIFSA, and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, 
the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Safeguards

Environment

2. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the preparation,
design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the lEEs, the EMPs, and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

3. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that all land and all rights-
of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with 
the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement 
activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in each LARP, and 
any corrective or preventative actions set forth in the Safeguards Monitoring Report.

4. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
each LARP, the Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with the Project until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with each LARP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with each LARP.

Indigenous Peoples

5. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the Project does not
have any indigenous peoples impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event that the 
Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take and shall cause AIFSA to take all 
steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of 
the Borrower and with the SPS.



18
Schedule 5

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

6. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the LARPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

7. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that all bidding documents
and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the lEEs, 
the EMPs, and the LARPs (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

8. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs, promptly inform 
ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description 
of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMPs and the LARPs promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.



19
Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

9. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards,, Health and Safety

10. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and 
incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do 
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HlV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

11. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure strictly monitor compliance
with the requirements set forth in paragraph 10 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

12. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include, but not limited to: (i) promote jobs'for female workers in the ALCs; (ii) 
improve entrepreneurial abilities for existing and potential women entrepreneurs; (iii) monitor 
employment cheated by the ALCs for female workers, and agribusiness start-ups by female 
entrepreneurs; (iv) recruit national social and gender officer in the project management office; 
(v) identify gender focal points in the ALC Management Company; and (vi) ensure collection 
of sex-disaggregated baseline and end-line information, and monitor trends on number of 
female beneficiaries.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

13. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to ensure that a joint safeguards grievance
redress mechanism acceptable to ADB is established in accordance with the provisions of the 
lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs at the project management office, within three months of the 
Effective Date, to consider safeguards complaints.

14. The safeguards grievance redress mechanism referred to in paragraph 13
above shall function to (a) review and document eligible complaints of Project stakeholders; 
(b) proactively address grievances; (c) provide the complainants with notice of the chosen 



20
Schedule 5

mechanism and/or action; and (d) prepare and make available to ADB upon request periodic 
reports to summarize (i) the number of complaints received and resolved;, (ii) chosen actions; 
and (iii) final outcomes of the grievances.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall make available requisite counterpart support, including,
without limitation, by exempting taxes and duties imposed on the Goods and within the territory 
of the Borrower for the timely, smooth and successful implementation of the Project. In 
addition, the Borrower shall ensure that AIFSA, at all times, have sufficient funds to satisfy its 
obligations arising from any Goods, Works or Consulting Services contract.

Financial/Operational Covenants

16. The Borrower shall cause MIFT to establish the ALC Management Company
on or before 31 December 2019 to ensure professional, independent, efficient and smooth 
operations of the ALCs.

17. To enable the ALC Management Company to be operationally and
commercially autonomous, and free from any interference by state agencies and local 
administrations, the Borrower shall and shall cause MIFT to ensure that the ALC Management 
Company, among others, has:

(a) independent decision-making powers;

(b) the ability to own its assets;

(c) the power to incur liabilities, for and on its own behalf, and accept and 
enter into future obligations and commitments;

(d) the capacity to implement an appropriate accounting system to enable 
it to submit its accounts to the national tax authorities in accordance with 
the applicable laws of the Borrower;

(e) ’ the power to borrow and raise funds;

(f) the ability to function in a manner that shall generate sufficient revenue 
to keep the ALCs in good working conditions and to enable them to meet 
the commercial, social, and environmental criteria applicable to such 
ALCs;

(g) no involvement in trading activities at the ALCs; and

(h) capacity to comply with prevailing legal and regulatory requirements.

18. For the purposes of monitoring the performance of the ALC Management
Company, the Borrower shall cause MIFT to carry out an annual assessment of the ALC 
Management Company, starting from the second year after commencement of commercial 
operations of the ALCs, by employing, among others, a combination of following financial and 
physical indicators: (a) Financial - return on assets (of at least equal to annual inflation rate of 



21
Schedule 5

the reporting year plus 2%); and debt to equity (not exceeding 1.5 times); and (b) Physical - 
occupancy rate of the wholesale market area (of not less than 65%); occupancy rate of the 
small-farmers’ market area for each ALC (of no less than 70%); total processing throughput in 
each. ALC for export and domestic sales (of no less than 700,000 tons); and utilization rate of 
cold storage capacity in each ALC (of no less than 900,000 tons).

19. The Borrower shall ensure that ADB’s written consent is obtained at least three
months prior to the implementation of any of the following: (a) change in the ownership of the 
ALC Management Company, any asset, facility or structure constructed under the Project; (b) 
sale, transfer or assignment of interest or control in the ALC Management Company, any asset, 
facility or structure constructed under the Project; (c) creation of a lien or charge on any asset 
of the ALC Management Company as security to borrow or raise funds; or (d) lease or other 
contract or modification of the functions and authority of the ALC Management Company over 
the operation and maintenance of any asset, facility or structure constructed under the Project. 
The Borrower shall ensure that ADB is promptly notified of any proposal to implement any such 
changes and that the notification includes sufficient details regarding the change to be 
implemented. The Borrower shall ensure that any such change shall be carried out in a legal 
and transparent manner.

Governance and Corruption

20. The Borrower, AIFSA and the implementing agencies (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

21. The Borrower, AIFSA and the implementing agencies shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of AIFSA, the implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, 
and other service providers as they relate to the Project.























































LOAN NUMBER 3724-MYA(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project)

/■
I

between

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 6 NOVEMBER 2018

MYA 48409



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 6 November 2018 between THE REPUBLIC OF 
THE UNION OF MYANMAR (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has also applied to the Global Agriculture and Food 
Security Program (“GAFSP”) for a grant (“GAFSP Grant”) and GAFSP has agreed to provide 
the Borrower a grant in the amount of twenty-two million Dollars ($22,000,000) to assist in 
financing a part of the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(c) “CSA" means climate smart agriculture;



2

(d) “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(e) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP" means each 
environmental management plan for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(g) “GAFSP Grant Agreement” means the grant agreement between ADB 
and the Borrower in relation to the GAFSP Grant;

(h) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(j) “Implementing Agencies” means (i) Department of Agriculture; (ii) 
Department of Planning; (iii) Department of Rural Development; (iv) 
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department; (v) 
Department of Agricultural Land Management and Statistics, each of 
MOALI; and (vi) Myanmar Trade Promotion Organization (MyanTrade) 
and Department of Consumer Affairs of the Ministry of Commerce, or 
any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which are responsible for the 
implementation of the Project;

(k) “Indigenous Peoples Plan” or “IPP" means each indigenous peoples 
plan for a Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the 
IPPF;

(I) “Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework” or “IPPF” means the 
indigenous peoples planning framework for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(m) "Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) "Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means each initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 



thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

“Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

“Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework” or “LARF” means the 
land acquisition and resettlement framework for the Project, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

“Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

“MOALi” means the Borrower's Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Irrigation or any successor thereto;

“PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
8 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

“Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

"Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
8 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

“Project Executing Agency" or “EA" for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of the Loan Regulations means MOALi or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of 
the Project;

“Resettlement Plan" or “RP” means each resettlement plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the LARF and 
cleared by ADB;

“Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS" means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

“Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP, the RP and the IPP 
(as applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;



4

(z) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject eligibility criteria set forth in the PAM; and

(aa) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty million five hundred thousand Dollars 
($40,500,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 January and 15 July in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2026 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (I) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors1 opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



6

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the GAFSP Grant Agreement shall have 
become liable for suspension or cancellation.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the GAFSP Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than the 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the GAFSP Grant Agreement has been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than the 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Union Minister of Planning and Finance of the 
Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of 
the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Planning and Finance
Building No. 26 Nay Pyi Taw
The Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Facsimile Number:

+95 67 410-198

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 636-2444
+632 636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF 
MYANMAR

By______________________________
DAW SI SI PYONE 

Director General 
Treasury Department, Ministry of 

Planning and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Country Director 
Myanmar Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to develop productive and resource efficient
agribusiness value chains.

2. The Project shall comprise Subprojects to achieve the following outputs:

Output 1: Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and 
made climate resilient - This includes (a) upgrading irrigation, farm roads, 
buildings, farm machinery, post-harvest equipment, seed testing equipment and 
agrometeorologicai stations, in seed farms; (b) rehabilitating tertiary canals and 
community reservoirs, and constructing shallow tube wells with some linked to 
drip and sprinkler technologies; (c) rehabilitating farm roads to climate resilient 
condition; and (d) upgrading the safety and quality testing equipment.

Output 2: Climate smart agriculture and agribusiness promoted - This 
includes (a) deploying climate resilient varieties of rice, beans, pulses and 
oilseeds; (b) strengthening capacity of seed growers, agro-dealers, and 
regional government staff on CSA technologies and production practices, 
certified seed production, farm mechanization and agribusiness plan 
development, and manufacturing practices; and (c) facilitating access to inputs, 
farm mechanization services and off farm rural livelihood opportunities.

Output 3: Enabling environment for climate friendly agribusiness 
enhanced - This includes (a) establishing an agribusiness policy cell within 
MOALl’s Department of Planning; (b) raising awareness and capacity of 
financial institutions to support climate friendly agribusiness; and (c) enhancing 
weather, market and credit information networks, and delivery of land 
administration services.

3. The Project will support Consulting Services to implement the above.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2025.

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge" is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1

Civil Works, Machinery and 
Equipment, Feasibility and 
Design, and Project 
Implementation Support

34,490,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

2 Training, Workshops and Studies 2,010,000 45% of total expenditure claimed

3 Weather, Credit and Market Information Support 620,000 45% of total expenditure claimed

3 Consultants 2,020,000 36% of total expenditure claimed

4 Interest Charge 1,360,000 100% total amount due

TOTAL 40,500,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

Eligible Source of Procurement

3. Goods, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the Project
from non-member countries of ADB.

4. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;
(b) National Competitive Bidding; and
(c) Shopping.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower's national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



15
Schedule 4

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until the Project Executing Agency has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE/EMP, as relevant, from the 
Borrower’s Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental 
Conservation; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final RP for such Subproject based on the Subproject’s detailed design and obtained ADB’s 
clearance of such RP.

9. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves impacts on indigenous peoples until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final IPP, as relevant, and obtained ADB's clearance of such IPP.

Consulting Services

10. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

11. The Borrower shall apply the following selection methods for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan:

(a) Qualification Based Selection for monitoring and evaluation and land 
administration technical services; and

(b) Single Source Selection for variety development and dissemination 
services.

12. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants as needed in accordance
with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

13. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.



16
Schedule 4

14. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

15. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency and the Implementing Agencies
shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set 
forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after 
approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between 
the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project, each Subproject and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EARF, each IEE, EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject 
categorized as Category A under the SPS is financed under the Project.

involuntary Resettlement

3. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities are made available to the Works contractor 
in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land 
acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
(b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the LARF, RP and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under the 
SPS is financed under the Project

4. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
LARF or the RP, the Borrower shall ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes 
place in connection with the Project until: (a) compensation and other entitlements, as relevant, 
have been provided to affected people in accordance with the RP; and (b) a comprehensive 
income and livelihood restoration program has been established in accordance with the RP.

Indigenous Peoples

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation and operation of the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous people; (b) 
the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; (c) all measures and requirements set forth in the IPPF 
and any IPP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under the 
SPS is financed under the Project.



18
Schedule 5

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

6. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human resources
to fully implement any EMP, RP and IPP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works
contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE, 
the EMP, the RP and any IPP (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP and the IPP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

8. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP, and the IPP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan in 
accordance with the SPS; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP, the RP or the IPP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.



19
Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

9. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
SPS.

Governance and Anticorruption

10. The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anti corruption Policy (1998, as
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing agency and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. 
Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment lists are ineligible to participate in 
ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the Project. If the Borrower 
becomes aware or has a reasonable suspicion that any member of the Borrower or executing 
agency has engaged in corrupt or fraudulent practices (as defined in ADB’s Anticorruption 
Policy) under or in connection with the Project or the loan, the Borrower shall take such timely 
and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to investigate and/or remedy the situation.

12. In addition to these requirements, to deter corruption and increase
transparency, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency shall make use of 
its existing website or create a Project website within 3 months from Effective Date, accessible 
by the public, to disclose various information concerning the Project including general 
information about the Project, public procurement related to the Project, Project progress and 
contact details in English and Myanmar language. The website shall also provide a link to 
ADB’s Integrity Unit for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations or corrupt practices 
arising out of the Project and Project activities. For each contract, the website shall include 
information on, among others, (a) the list of participating bidders; (b) name of the winning 
bidder; (c) basic details on bidding procedures adopted; (d) amount of contract awarded; and 
(e) list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services. The Project Executing Agency shall permit 
any bidder to request an explanation as to why a bid was unsuccessful and the Project 
Executing Agency shall respond promptly. The website shall be updated regularly. In addition 
to the web-based disclosure, the stakeholders shall be provided by the Project Executing 
Agency with detailed information on procurement on public notice boards in their respective 
areas.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among others, (a) comply with all 
applicable labor laws and regulations of the Borrower; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation on the basis of age, gender, 



20
Schedule 5

ethnicity, religion or caste; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from 
developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their 
rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; (f) advertise labor requirements 
in a timely manner prior to recruitment, in a venue that can reasonably be expected to be seen 
by interested men and women; (g) provide workers with written contract, adequate on-the-job 
training and safety training; (h) not restrict freedom of association of workers; and 
(i) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the 
risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
areas, particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the 
requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender Action Plan

14. The Borrower shall ensure that the (a) GAP is implemented in accordance with
its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors 
to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for 
implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets are regularly monitored and reported 
to ADB.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds for the Project are provided
on a timely basis, including personnel cost. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall 
ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising 
from any Works, Goods and Consulting Services contract.

16. The Borrower shall ensure that all completed Subprojects have adequate
counterpart funds for operation and maintenance of infrastructure allocated to them on a yearly 
basis and made available on a timely basis. The Project Executing Agency shall further ensure 
that the farmer water user communities and water user groups collect adequate irrigation 
service fees to sustain the operation and maintenance of distribution canals in accordance with 
the Borrower's decree on farmer water user communities.

Subproject selection

17. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that all Subprojects selected for financing under the Project meet the screening and eligibility 
criteria as agreed between the Borrower and ADB and documented in the PAM.




































































48098-002: Balochistan Water Resources Development Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3700-PAK(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Balochistan Water Resources Development Sector Project)

. between

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED

PAK 48098



LOAN AGREEMENT
{Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 7 ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN ("Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB"}. '

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan, and to the Japan Fund for 
Poverty Reduction ("JFPR1’) and the High-Level Technology Fund ("HLTF") for grants to be 
administered by ADB, for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“JFPR Grant 
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make the proceeds of a grant from JFPR (“JFPR Grant”) in 
the amount of three million Dollars ($3,000,000) available to the Borrower for the purposes of 
financing expenditures under Part B of the Project;

(C) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“HLTF Grant 
Agreement" and, together with the JFPR Grant Agreement, “Grant Agreements”), ADB has 
agreed to make the proceeds of a grant from HLTF (“HLTF Grant” and, together with the JFPR 
Grant, “Grants") in the amount of two million Dollars ($2,000,000) available to the Borrower for 
the purposes of financing expenditures under Part C of the Project;

(D) the Project will be carried out by Balochistan, and, for this purpose, the 
Borrower will make available to Balochistan the proceeds of the Grants and the loan provided 
for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement between ADB and Balochistan;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein

Section 1.02. ' Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used In this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “ACD" means the Agriculture and Cooperatives Department of 
Balochistan, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(b) "Balochistan” means the Province of Balochistan, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;

(c) "Consulting Guidelines" means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(d) "Consulting Services" means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants as described in paragraph 3 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(e) "EARF" or "Environmental Assessment and Review Framework" means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 

' including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(f) ' "EIA" or "Environmental Impact Assessment" means the environmental
impact assessment for a Subproject, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements 
set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(g) "EMP" or "Environmental Management Plan" means the environmental 
management plan for a Subproject, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the EIA or IEE, as the case may be, for the Subproject;

(h) "Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable), of the 
SPS;

(i) . "IEE” or "Initial Environmental Examination" means the initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(j) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable), of the SPS;

(k) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(I) "Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(m) "ID” means the Irrigation Department of Balochistan, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;



3

(n) "LARF" or "Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework" means the 
land acquisition and resettlement framework for the Project, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

(o) "LARP" or "Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan" means the land 
acquisition and resettlement plan for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the LARF and cleared by ADB;

(p) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(q) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 19 
July 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from 
time to time in accordance with the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower and ADB;

(r) "Procurement Guidelines” means ADB's Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(s) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
19 July 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(t) "Project Executing Agency" for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations (as this term is 
defined in the Grant Agreements) means Balochistan, acting through ID, 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for 
the carrying out of the Project;

(u) "Project and Subproject facilities" means the facilities to be constructed, 
improved, upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted, protected or 
provided under the Project;

(v) "Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower.to ADB that describes progress with the 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMPs and the LARPs (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(w) "SPS" or "Safeguard Policy Statement" means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(x) "Subproject" means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject eligibility criteria set out in the PAM; and

(y) “Works” means construction or- civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants, including services such as drilling 
or mapping, and project related services that are provided as part of a 



4

single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting 
Services,

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2,01, (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter,

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 April and 1 October in each year.

Section 2.04, The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall make the proceeds of the Loan 
available 'to Balochistan upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and shall cause 
Balochistan to apply such proceeds exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.



5

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement,

Section 3,04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 . 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4,01,. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project and Subproject facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all 
obligations set forth in Schedule 5.to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

. Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents. .

Section 4.03. ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial 
statements for the Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 
days of the date of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

Section 4,04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable Balochistan to perform its obligations under the Project 
Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the performance 
of such obligations.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for the 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
JFPR Grant Agreement; and

(b) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
HLTF Grant Agreement,

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for the 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.



6

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement or the HLTF Grant Agreement) have been fulfilled; and

(b) the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement or the JFPR Grant Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02. The following are specified as additional matters, for the
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) that the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and is legally binding on the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) that the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and is legally binding on the 
Borrower In accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Delegation of Authority

Section 7.01. The Borrower hereby designates Balochistan as its agent
for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or permitted 
under Sections 3.02, 3.03 and 3.04 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02, 
5.03 and 5.04 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7,02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by
Balochistan pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement 
shall be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if taken by 
the Borrower.



7

Section 7.03. The authority conferred on Balochistan under Section
7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the Borrower 
and ADB.

ARTICLE VIII

Miscellaneous

Section 8.01. The Secretary, Economic Affairs Division, Ministry of 
Finance, Revenue and Economic Affairs of the Borrower is designated as representative of the 
Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 8.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.Q1 of the Loan Regulations: . ’

For the Borrower

Secretary
Economic Affairs Division
Ministry of Finance, Revenue and Economic Affairs
Islamabad, Pakistan

Facsimile Number:

(92-51) 910 4016.

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2424.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto,. acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is increased agricultural productivity in the Zhob
and Mula river basins in the Province of Balochistan.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Part A

(a) the construction and rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and 
watershed protection, including the construction, upgrade and 
rehabilitation of the Siri Toi Dam with a storage of approximately 
36,000,000 cubic meters including a spillway and water intake; weirs 
and infiltration galleries; approximately 276 kilometers of irrigation 
network; infrastructure to reduce flood risks to irrigation canals and the 
command area; facilities to increase women’s access to water for 
domestic use; and watershed protection for approximately 4,145 
hectares;

(b) the establishment and improvement of command areas, including the 
development of approximately 16,592 hectares of command area 
(including approximately 1,839 hectares for rainwater harvesting 
(khuskaba) farming); and

(c) the strengthening of institutional capacity, including the provision of 
training to ID and ACD on project management, financial management, 
procurement, disbursement, gender and social and environmental 
safeguards, and the development of infrastructure for improved project 
management and training;

Part B

(d) . further to the establishment and improvement of command areas, the 
pilot testing of approximately 130 hectares of high-value agriculture in 
the Project area; and

Part C

(e) further to the strengthening of institutional capacity, the procurement of 
hydrometeorological equipment to strengthen information collection and 
water use monitoring.

Part A shall be financed by ADB; Part B shall be financed by JFPR; and Part C shall be 
financed by HLTF, all In accordance with the terms and conditions of this Loan Agreement, the 
JFPR Grant Agreement, and the HLTF Grant Agreement.



10

Schedule 1

3. The Project shall include the provision of consulting services for detailed
engineering design, construction supervision, and implementation support, including the 
provision of training.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2023.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1, The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to "Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to the Category "Interest Charge" is for financing the
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled .to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14

Schedule's

Retroactive Financing

6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement, in connection with the Consulting Services for 
detailed design, construction supervision and Implementation support to the Project; Goods 
and Works; and provision of training, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the 
Loan amount,



15
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($)
Basis for Withdrawal from 

the Loan Account
Category

1 Civil Works 88,350,000 87.5% of total expenditure 
claimed

2 Goods 1,150,000 83% of total expenditure claimed

. 3 Consulting Services 
and Training 6,000,000

83% of total expenditure 
claimed

4 Recurrent Cost - Project Management 1,280,000
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

5 Interest Charge 3,220,000 100% of amounts due
TOTAL 100,000,000



16

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree. Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines,'as applicable.

Eligible Source of Procurement oJ Civil Works, Goods and Consulting Services

4. Civil Works, Goods and Consulting Services may also be procured under Parts
A and C of the Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding;

(c) Shopping; and

(d) Community Participation in Procurement.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of-any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrowers national competitive 
bidding procedures are .consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and1 ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



17

Schedule 4

Community Participation in Procurement

7. The Borrower may use community participation in procurement for Works
contracts for command area development, watershed management, farmers managed small 
private irrigation systems and farm irrigation systems improvement, and high value agriculture 
as may be provided .in, and in accordance with the agreed procedures set out in, the 
Procurement Plan.

Conditions for Award of Contract

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until Balochistan has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the EIA or IEE, as the case may be, from 
the relevant environment authority of the Borrower; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

9. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB- 
the final LARP for such Subproject based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained 
ADB's clearance of such LARP.

Consulting Services

10. The Borrower shall apply Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting
Services.

11, The Borrower shall recruit the Individual consultants for the Siri Toi Dam panel
of experts in, accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual 
consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

12. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts, for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

13. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate of infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.



18

Schedule 4

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

14, Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan,

15. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB's prior
review, the Borrower shall seek ADB’s prior approval of any modification or waiver of the terms 
and conditions of the contract, including:

(a) granting an extension of the stipulated time for completion of a contract 
for a period of 1 month or more, or which is likely to require an extension 
of the Loan Closing Date or the Grant Closing Date (as indicated in the 
Grant Agreements); and

(b) increases in aggregate of the original price by more than 5% (for the 
avoidance of doubt, such increase shall take into account any previous 

. change under such contract).

16. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s post
review, ADB shall review the required contract modification or waiver and respond to the 
Borrower’as soon as practicable, but not later than 1 month after the receipt of the required 
document.

17. The Borrower shall provide to ADB copies of all time extensions, modifications
or waivers to the contracts (including change orders) within 1 month following amendment of 
the contract.



19

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project

implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and Balochistan shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after the approval of such change by the Borrower and 
ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM, on the one hand, and this Loan 
Agreement, the Grant Agreements or the Project Agreement, on the other, the provisions of 
this Loan Agreement, the Grant Agreements and the Project Agreement shall prevail. As more 
particularly described in the PAM, Balochistan shall implement the Project through ID and ACD 
and their respective responsibilities shall be as set out in the PAM.

2. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, within 3
months from the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, (i) ID will appoint and engage a financial 
management specialist for the Project management office in ID; and (II) each of iD and ACD 
will adopt a financial management manual for the Project with detailed procedures on 
budgeting and planning, funds withdrawal and management, bank account management, 
expenditure management, accounting and bookkeeping, financial reporting, and fixed asset 
management, as may be acceptable to ADB.

3. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that ID and ACD
will consult ADB regarding all significant matters related to the management and 
implementation of the Project, including the selection, appointment or change of the Project 
Director at the Project management office in ID or the Deputy Project Director at the Project 
implementation office in ACD to ensure continuity, transparency, and efficiency in the 
management of the Project.

Environment

4. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project, each Subproject and all Project and Subproject facilities comply with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan relating to environment, health, and 
safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the ElAs, I EEs and EMPs, and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

5. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all land and all
rights-of-way required for the Project, each Subproject and all Project and Subproject facilities 
are made available to each Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under 
the relevant Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities are 
implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and 
Balochistan relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the LARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the relevant LARP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards



20

Schedule 5

Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall also ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all 
land acquisition and resettlement activities will comply with the specific Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards arrangements and requirements set out in the PAM. For the 
avoidance of doubt, the Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no land 
is acquired, for the purposes of the Project or any Subproject, under the emergency acquisition 
provisions of the Borrower's Land Acquisition Act (1894), as amended from time to time.

6. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
LARF or any LARP, the Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no 
physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with any Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the LARP for the Subproject; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the LARP for the Subproject.

7. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the Project
and all Subprojects do not have any indigenous peoples impact within the meaning of the 
Safeguard Policy Statement. In the event that the Project or any Subproject does have any 
such impact, the Borrower shall take and cause Balochistan to take all steps required to ensure 
that the Project or the Subproject, as the case may be, complies with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan and with the Safeguard Policy Statement.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

8. The Borrower shall make available or cause Balochistan to make available
necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the LARPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

9. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the relevant EIA or iEE (as the case may be), EMP and LARP 
(to the extent they concern impacts, on affected people during 
construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set out in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental or resettlement risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project or any



21

Schedule 5

Subproject that were not considered in the relevant EIA or I EE (as the 
case.may be), EMP or LARP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

. (e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

10. The Borrower shall do the following or cause Balochistan to do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB during the 
construction of the Project and the Subprojects and until their 
completion, and, thereafter, submit annual reports to ADB during their 
operation, and disclose the relevant information from such reports to 
affected persons promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project or any 
Subproject that were not considered in the relevant EIA or IEE (as the 
case may be), EMP or LARP, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of 
such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan;

(c) no later than the date that is 3 months from and after the effectiveness 
of this Loan Agreement, engage qualified and experienced external 
experts or qualified NGOs under a selection process and terms of 
reference acceptable to ADB to verify information produced through the 
Project monitoring process, and facilitate the carrying out of any 
verification activities by such external experts;

(d) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in an EMP or LARP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

11. ■ The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no proceeds
of the Loan or Grants are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

12. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the core labor
standards and the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan are 



22

Schedule 5

complied with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall include or cause Balochistan 
to include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under 
the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things, (a) comply with the applicable 
labor law and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan and incorporate applicable 
workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers 
in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining ; and (f) disseminate,, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including H1V/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the 
Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area and Subproject 
areas, particularly women.

13. The Borrower shall strictly monitor or cause Balochistan to strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 12 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Gender and Development

14. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for the implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on the 
Implementation of the GAP, including progress towards achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include: (i) at least 30% of all consultations held during the design and 
construction phase of each Subproject are held with women groups; (ii) at least 30% of all 
Subprojects have facilities for increased access by women to water for domestic use, for 
instance washing facilities and water collection points; (iii) at least 200 women and girls are 
trained in kitchen gardening skills; (iv) at least 250 women are trained for income-generating 
high-value agri-businesses; and (v) at least 22 women-led small-scale income-generating agri­
businesses are launched.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to make available all counterpart funds
required for the timely and effective implementation of the Project, including for any shortfall of 
funds or cost overrun, through providing annual budget allocations and releasing applicable 
funds in a timely manner. In addition, the Borrower shall provide all necessary support to 
Balochistan and ensure that Balochistan has sufficient funds to satisfy all liabilities arising from 
any Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract under the Project

Operational Covenants

16. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the selection
of sites for the feasibility study of potential subprojects, and the selection of sites for the 
implementation of Subprojects, will be undertaken in accordance with such criteria and 
procedures as may be agreed upon between Balochistan and ADB. The Borrower shall cause 
Balochistan to select all Subprojects in accordance with the criteria and procedures set out in 
the PAM.



23

Schedule 5

17. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no Subproject
will involve, and no proceeds of the Loan or the Grants will be used to support, groundwater 
extraction by deep tubewells, turbine pumps, or tapping of karezes.

18. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, for each
Subproject, the local communities in the Subproject area will be fully involved in the planning, 
design, implementation and maintenance of the Subproject and related initiatives in the areas 
of integrated water resources management, command area development, and agricultural 
support services. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that both male 
and female members of the local communities will be consulted and involved.

19. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the Project
and each Subproject will be implemented in accordance with applicable design and technical 
specifications and construction norms satisfactory to ADB, and construction supervision, 
quality control and contract management shall be performed in accordance with international 
and national standards.

20. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, within 3
months from the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, ID will appoint an independent dam 
safety panel of eminent national engineers which will review the detailed design of proposed 
subprojects involving the construction of dams, oversee dam construction, and confirm to ADB 
that the design and construction of the dams meet international safety standards.

21. (a) The Borrower shall ensure and . cause Balochistan to ensure that all
Project and Subproject facilities will be operated and maintained, in an effective and 
sustainable manner, in accordance with the applicable laws, regulations and standards of the 
Borrower and Balochistan and, in other respects not covered by such laws, regulations and 
standards, in accordance with best international industry practice.

(b) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to develop, approve and adopt 
an operation and maintenance plan, including an annual budget, for all Works to be 
constructed, improved, upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted or protected under the 
Project, including the water resources information system to be established with assistance 
from the Project, prior to their completion.

(c) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to ensure that budgetary and 
other resources are allocated timely and provided promptly as necessary and appropriate for 
the operation and maintenance of the Project and Subproject facilities, and, at any given time, 
the amount of such budgetary and other resources shall not be less than the total sum required, 
at that time, to cover and defray the operation and maintenance expenditures indicated in the 
then current annual budget referenced in sub-paragraph (b).

(d) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to review its irrigation tariff policy 
and prepare draft reforms for the policy, which include the Introduction of irrigation tariffs for 
small irrigation systems, on or before 31 December 2020.

(e) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to timely and promptly prepare 
operation and maintenance manuals and provide operation and maintenance training to the 
farmer communities and organizations that will assume the operation and maintenance of the 



24

Schedule 5

small irrigation systems and on-farm irrigation facilities that will be constructed, Improved, 
upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted or protected under the Project.

Security

22. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure (through the
political administration of the relevant local governments in the Project area and Subproject 
areas) that adequate security is provided for the smooth and uninterrupted implementation of 
the Project and the Subprojects. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan .to ensure 
that (i) all Works contracts under the Project include a security plan to ensure the safety of 
Project contractors’ personnel and consultants, and each such security plan allocates sufficient 
budget under the relevant Works contract or through Balochistan’s counterpart funding; and 
(ii) all relevant permits are issued and all access and other necessary requirements are 
provided so that all security plans will be successfully implemented.

Governance and Anti corrupt! on

23. The Borrower and Balochistan shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy
(1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

24. The Borrower and Balochistan shall' ensure that anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and Implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

25. The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to provide updated information on the
Project on its website, including information on performance, business opportunities, bidding 
process and guidelines, outcorhe of biddings, and summary progress reports.























































LOAN NUMBER 8346-CAM(EF)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(ADB Green Climate Fund)

(Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
acting as an accredited entity of the 

Green Climate Fund

DATED 6 JULY 2018

CAM 48409



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(ADB Green Climate Fund)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 6 July 2018 between KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA 
(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB"), acting not in its individual capacity, 
but solely in its capacity as an accredited entity of the Green Climate Fund (“GCF”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement 
(as defined herein);

(B) ADB has established the ADB Green Climate Fund to receive, hold in 
trust and administer GCF funds;

(C) by an agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB 
(the “Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a 
concessional loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in the amount of 
ninety million Dollars ($90,000,000) for the purposes of the Project (“Ordinary Operations 
Loan”);

(D) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB, ADB, acting in its capacity as an accredited entity of GCF in accordance with the 
Accreditation Master Agreement dated 17 August 2017 (“AMA”) and the Funded Activity 
Agreement to be entered into between GCF and ADB (“FAA"), has agreed to provide from the 
ADB Green Climate Fund a grant in the amount of thirty million Dollars ($30,000,000) to assist 
in financing a part of the Project; and

(E) ADB, acting in its capacity as an accredited entity of GCF in accordance 
with the AMA and the FAA, between GCF and ADB, has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower 
from the ADB Green Climate Fund upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1

Standard Terms; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of the Standard Terms (“Standard Terms") 
attached hereto in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement shall apply to this Loan Agreement.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Standard Terms and Section 1.02 of the Ordinary Operations



2

[Concessional] Loan Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from the ADB
Green Climate Fund an amount of ten million Dollars ($10,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower acknowledges that the Loan is funded out 
of resources made available by the GCF to ADB as an accredited entity of the GCF. In 
accordance with Section 2.02 of the Standard Terms, the Borrower may only withdraw Loan 
proceeds subject to the availability of such resources.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay to ADB a service charge at the 
rate of 0.25% per annum on the amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and 
outstanding from time to time,

Section 2,04. The service charge on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 June and 15 December in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the service charge shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE 111

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 



3

provisions of Schedule 5 to the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement and the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan 
Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has not been procured 
under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between the Borrower and 
ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory to ADB.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 7.02 
of the Standard Terms shall be 31 March 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agency to (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual 
financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and 
(v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the close of the fiscal year to which they relate, 
copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, ail in the 
English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit 
thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower and its financial affairs where they relate 
to the Project with the auditors appointed by the Borrower pursuant to subsections (a)(iii) and 



4

(b) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any representative of such auditors to 
participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions 
shall be conducted only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the 
Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.03. ADB’s obligation to disburse any amount from the Loan 
Account shall be subject to ADB’s receipt of a corresponding amount from GCF in accordance 
with the terms of the AMA and the FAA,

Section 4. 04. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 7.01(1) of the Standard Terms:

(a) the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement shall have 
become liable for suspension or cancellation or shall have become 
repayable prior to its agreed maturity date; and

(b) the GCF Grant Agreement shall have become liable for suspension or 
cancellation.

Sec tion 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 7.07 (d) of the Standard Terms: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Sec tion 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 8.01(c) of the Standard 
Terms:

(a) the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement shall have 
been duly executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all 
conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than the condition 



5

requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement and GCF Grant 
Agreement) shall have been fulfilled; and

(b) the GCF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than the condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement and the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan 
Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 8.02 of the Standard Terms, to be included in the opinion or opinions to 
be furnished to ADB: the Ordinary Operations [Concessional] Loan Agreement and the GCF 
Grant Agreement have been duly executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all 
conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than the exceptions referred to in Section 
6.01 (a) and (b) above) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 8.04 of the 
Standard Terms.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 10.02 of the Standard 
Terms.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 10.01 of the Standard Terms:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance
St. 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

+855 23 427-798
+855 23 428-424



6

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 636-2444 
+632 636-2231.



7

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

By
H.E. Dr. AUN PORNMONIROTH 

Senior Minister
Minister of Economy and Finance

i 
i

i

|

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Bv
HIDEAKI IWASAKI 

Acting Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Standard Terms

ARTICLE I

Definitions; Interpretation

Section 1.01, Definitions. Except where the context otherwise 
requires, the following terms have the following meanings wherever used in these Standard 
Terms:

(a) "ADB Green Climate Fund” means the trust fund established and 
administered by ADB to receive, hold in trust and administer the GCF 
funds transferred to ADB by GCF;

(b) “assets" includes property, revenues and claims of any kind;

(c) “convertible currency" means any currency so designated by ADB at any 
time;

(d) “currency" of a country or a territory means such currency as at the time 
referred to is legal tender for the payment of public and private debts in 
that country or territory;

(e) “Dollar” or the sign each means the lawful currency of the United 
States of America;

(f) “Effective Date” means the date on which the Loan Agreement shall 
have come into force and effect pursuant to Section 8,03 of this 
Schedule 1;

(g) “foreign currency” means any currency other than currency of the 
member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out;

(h) “Green Climate Fund” or “GCF” means the fund established within the 
framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change in 2010, and governed under the Governing Instrument;

(i) "guarantee” includes, as the case requires, any counter-guarantee, 
indemnity or any other arrangement which has the effect of a guarantee, 
counter-guarantee or indemnity, given by a member in favor, or for the 
benefit of ADB;

Q) “lien” includes mortgages, pledges, charges, privileges and priorities of 
any kind;

(k) "Loan" means the loan provided for in this Loan Agreement;



9
Schedule 1

(I) “Loan Account” means the account opened or to be opened by ADB on 
its books in the name of the Borrower to which the amount of the Loan 
has been or will be credited;

(m) “Loan Closing Date" means the date specified by ADB that is not later 
than the first Principal Payment Date shown in the amortization 
schedule to the Loan Agreement, or such other date as may be agreed 
between ADB and the Borrower for such purpose;

(n) “Loan Currency” means the currency in which the principal amount of 
the Loan is denominated from time to time;

(o) “member" means a member of ADB;

(p) “Multilateral Development Bank Fee" means the management fee 
specified in this Loan Agreement;

(q) “Principal Payment Date" means each date specified in the Loan 
Agreement on which all or any portion of the principal amount of the 
Loan is payable;

(r) “Project Executing Agency" means the Borrower’s Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries or any successor thereto;

(s) “service charge" means a charge made on the Loan pursuant to Section 
2.04 to the Loan Agreement; and

(t) “taxes” includes imposts, levies, fees and duties of any nature, whether 
in effect at the date of the Loan Agreement or thereafter imposed.

Section 1.02. Interpretation. Except where the context 
otherwise requires, (a) a reference to the Incurring of debt includes the assumption and 
guarantee of debt; (b) references in these Standard Terms to Articles or Sections are to Articles 
or Sections of these Standard Terms; (c) the headings of the Articles and Sections are inserted 
for convenience of reference only and are not a part of these Standard Terms; (d) singular may 
include plural and vice versa; and (e) a reference to any gender includes any other gender.

ARTICLE II

Loan Account; Service Charge; Multilateral Development Bank Fee; 
Repayment; Place of Payment

Section 2.01. Loan Account. The principal amount of the Loan 
shall be credited to the Loan Account in the Loan Currency and may be withdrawn therefrom 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement.



10
Schedule 1

Section 2.02. Funding Shortfall. Notwithstanding the provisions 
of Section 2.01, no withdrawals shall be made if, as a result of such withdrawal, the total 
amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account would exceed the amount available to 
ADB from resources provided to it for purposes of the Loan. Only the resources made available 
to ADB for the purposes of the Loan shall be considered for the enforcement of any obligations, 
claims or liabilities under or in connection with the Loan.

Section 2.03. Service Charge. A service charge at the rate 
specified in this Loan Agreement shall be payable on the principal amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time. The service charge shall 
accrue from the respective dates on which amounts shall be withdrawn from the Loan Account. 
ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the 
Borrower, the amounts required to meet service charge payments, when and if due.

Section 2.04. Multilateral Development Bank Fee. 
The Borrower shall pay ADB a Multilateral Development Bank Fee on the Loan at the rate 
specified in this Loan Agreement. If this Loan Agreement provides for the financing of the 
Multilateral Development Bank Fee out of the proceeds of the Loan, ADB shall, on behalf of 
the Borrower, withdraw from the Loan Account on or after the Effective Date and pay to itself 
the amount of the Multilateral Development Bank Fee.

Section 2.05. Computation of Service Charge and Other Charges. 
The service charge and the Multilateral Development Bank Fee, if the Borrower elects to pay 
the Multilateral Development Bank Fee not as a lump sum but semiannually at a rate per 
annum calculated on the unwithdrawn amount of the Loan from time to time, shall be computed 
on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months.

Section 2.06. Repayment and Prepayment (a) The Borrower 
shall repay ADB the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in 
accordance with the provisions of, and the amortization schedule to, this Loan Agreement.

(b) After giving not less than 45 days’ written notice to ADB, the Borrower 
shall have the right to repay in advance of maturity, as of a date acceptable to ADB (provided, 
that the Borrower shall have paid all amounts due under this Loan Agreement as of such date) 
(i) all of the principal amount of the Loan then outstanding; or (ii) all of the principal amount of 
any one or more maturities of the Loan.

(c) If ADB shall at any time receive from the Borrower any amount which is 
(i) less than the full amount then due and payable to ADB under this Loan Agreement; or (ii) 
less than the full amount repayable to ADB in accordance with paragraph (b) of this Section, 
ADB shall have the right to allocate and apply the amount so received in any manner and for 
such purposes under this Loan Agreement as ADB shall in its sole discretion determine.

Sec tion 2.07. Place of Payment. The principal of, and service 
charge and other charges (including the Multilateral Development Bank Fee) on, the Loan shall 
be paid at such places as ADB shall reasonably request.



11
Schedule 1

ARTICLE III

Currency Provisions

Section 3.01. Currency of Withdrawal. Withdrawals from the 
Loan Account shall be made in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.02. Currency of Payment. The principal of the Loan 
shall be repaid in the Loan Currency and, the service charge on any portion of the Loan and 
the Multilateral Development Bank Fee shall be paid in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.03. Purchase of Currencies. If the Borrower shall so 
request, ADB shall, acting as agent of the Borrower, and on such terms and conditions as ADB 
shall determine, purchase the Loan Currency for the purpose of repayment of principal, and 
payment of service charge and the Multilateral Development Bank Fee upon timely payment 
by the Borrower of sufficient funds for that purpose in a currency or currencies acceptable to 
ADB; provided, however, that the Borrower shall be deemed to have made any payment 
required under this Loan Agreement only when and to the extent that ADB has received such 
payment in the Loan Currency.

Section 3.04. Valuation of Currencies. Whenever it shall be 
necessary for the purposes of this Loan Agreement to determine the value of one currency in 
terms of another, such value shall be as reasonably determined by ADB.

Section 3.05. Manner of Payment. (a) Any payment 
required under this Loan Agreement to be made to ADB in the currency of any country shall 
be made in such manner, and in currency acquired in such manner, as shall be permitted 
under the laws of such country for the purpose of making such payment and effecting the 
deposit of such currency to the account of ADB with a depository of ADB in such country.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that the principal of, and the service charge 
and other charges on, the Loan are paid without restrictions of any kind imposed by, or in the 
territory of, the Borrower.

ARTICLE IV

Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

Section 4.01. Withdrawal from the Loan Account. (a) Loan 
proceeds shall be used only for the purposes of the Project. Subject to any conditions or 
restrictions specified in this Loan Agreement, the Borrower shall be entitled to withdraw from 
the Loan Account such amounts as shall have been paid, or, if ADB shall so agree, such 
amounts as shall be required to meet payments to be made, for the reasonable cost of goods, 
services and any other expenditures required for the Project and to be financed under this 
Loan Agreement. If at any time ADB determines that any amount of the Loan proceeds 
withdrawn from the Loan Account has been used by the Borrower in a manner inconsistent 



12
Schedule 1

with the provisions of the Loan Agreement, the Borrower shall promptly refund such amount 
to ADB.

(b) Except as ADB and the Borrower shall otherwise agree, no withdrawals 
shall be made on account of expenditures incurred prior to the Effective Date. ADB may refuse 
to finance a contract where goods and services have not been procured in accordance with 
procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between the Borrower and ADB or 
where the terms and conditions of the contract are not satisfactory to ADB. If at any time ADB 
determines that any amount of the Loan proceeds withdrawn from the Loan Account has been 
used by the Borrower to finance such contracts, the Borrower shall promptly refund such 
amount to ADB.

(c) Withdrawals of the proceeds of the Loan from the Loan Account shall 
be made in the Loan Currency. ADB may, at the request and acting as an agent of the 
Borrower, and on such terms and conditions as ADB shall determine, purchase with such 
currency withdrawn from the Loan Account such other currencies as the Borrower shall 
reasonably request to meet payments for items of expenditure to be financed from the Loan. 
Whenever it shall be necessary for the purpose of this Loan Agreement to determine the value 
of one currency in terms of another, such value shall be as reasonably determined by ADB.

Section 4.02. Commitment Letters by ADB. Upon the 
Borrower's request, ADB may issue commitment letters to pay amounts in respect of the cost 
of goods and services to be financed under the Loan, notwithstanding any subsequent 
suspension or cancellation.

Section 4.03. Application for Withdrawal. When the Borrower 
shall desire to withdraw any amount from the Loan Account or to request ADB to issue 
commitment letters pursuant to Section 4,02, the Borrower shall promptly deliver to ADB an 
application in such form and containing such statements, representations, warranties and 
agreements, as ADB shall reasonably request. Except as ADB and the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree, applications for withdrawal, with the necessary documentation as hereinafter 
in this Article provided, shall be made promptly in relation to the expenditures for the Project.

Section 4.04. Evidence of Authority to Sign Applications.
The Borrower shall furnish to ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person authorized 
to sign applications for withdrawal and the authenticated specimen signature of each person.

Section 4.05. Supporting Evidence. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB such documents and other evidence in support of the application for withdrawal 
as ADB shall reasonably request, whether before or after ADB shall have permitted any 
withdrawal requested in the application.

Section 4.06. Sufficiency of Applications and Documents. 
Each application for withdrawal and the accompanying documents and all other evidence must 
be sufficient in form and substance to satisfy ADB that the Borrower is entitled to withdraw 
from the Loan Account the amount applied for and that the amount to be withdrawn from the 
Loan Account is to be used only for the purposes specified in this Loan Agreement.



13
Schedule 1

Section 4.07. Payment by ADB. Payment by ADB of amounts 
which the Borrower is entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account shall be made to or on the 
order of the Borrower.

ARTICLE V

Particular Covenants

Section 5.01. Cooperation and Information. (a) ADB and 
the Borrower shall cooperate fully to ensure that the purposes of the Loan will be 
accomplished. To that end, ADB and the Borrower shall:

(i) from time to time, at the request of any one of them, exchange 
views with regard to any matters relating to the progress of the 
Project, the purposes of the Loan or the maintenance of the 
service thereof, the performance of their respective obligations 
under this Loan Agreement, [the performance by the Project 
Executing Agency of its obligations,] and furnish to the other 
party all such related information as it shall reasonably request; 
and

(ii) promptly inform each other of any condition which interferes 
with, or threatens to interfere with, the matters referred to in 
paragraph (a)(i) of this Section.

(b) The Borrower shall afford all reasonable opportunity for ADB's 
representatives to visit any part of its territory for purposes related to the Loan.

Section 5.02. Negative Pledge. (a) If the Borrower shall 
create or permit the creation of any lien on any of its assets as security for any foreign currency 
debt, the Borrower undertakes to expressly provide that such lien will ipso facto equally and 
ratably secure the payment of the principal of, and service charge on, the Loan. If any statutory 
lien shall be created on any assets of the Borrower (as hereinafter defined), as security for any 
foreign currency debt, the Borrower shall grant to ADB an equivalent lien satisfactory to ADB.

(b) The provisions of paragraph (a) of this Section shall not apply to (i) any 
lien created on property, at the time of purchase thereof, solely as security for payment of the 
purchase price of such property; or (ii) any lien arising in the ordinary course of banking 
transactions and securing a debt maturing not more than one year after its date.

(c) The term “assets of the Borrower" as used in paragraph (a) of this 
Section includes assets of any political subdivision or any agency of the Borrower and assets 
of any agency of such political subdivision, and assets of any entity owned or controlled by, or 
operating for the account or benefit of, the Borrower or any such political subdivision or agency, 
including any other institution performing the functions of a central bank for the Borrower.



14
Schedule 1

Section 5.03. Insurance. (a) The Borrower shall take out 
and maintain with responsible insurers, or make other arrangements satisfactory to ADB for, 
insurance against such risks and in such amounts as shall be consistent with sound practice. 
The Borrower shall be deemed to have opted for self-insurance in the absence of any specific 
insurance for the Project.

(b) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Borrower undertakes 
to insure, or cause to be insured, the goods to be imported for the Project and to be financed 
out of the proceeds of the Loan against hazards incident to the acquisition, transportation and 
delivery thereof to the place of use or installation, and for such insurance any indemnity shall 
be payable in a currency freely usable to replace or repair such goods.

Sec tion 5.04. Records, Financial Statements and Audits.
The Borrower shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, records and financial statements 
adequate to Identify the goods, services and other items of expenditure financed under the 
Project; to record the progress of the Project (including the cost thereof and); to reflect, in 
accordance with consistently maintained sound financial reporting principles, the operations 
and financial condition of the Project; and to have the financial statements audited. Related 
requirements shall be specified in the Loan Agreement.

Section 5.05. Reports. (a) The Borrower shall furnish, or 
cause to be furnished, to ADB all such reports as ADB shall reasonably request concerning (i) 
the Loan, and the expenditure of the proceeds and maintenance of the service thereof; (ii) the 
goods, services and other items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan; (iii) 
the Project and the Project Executing Agency; (iv) the administration, operations and financial 
condition of the Borrower; and (v) any other matters relating to the purposes of the Loan.

(b) The Borrower shall promptly inform ADB of any condition which 
interferes with, or threatens to interfere with, the progress of the Project, the performance of 
their respective obligations under the Loan Agreement, the accomplishment of the purposes 
of the Loan, or the maintenance of the service thereof; and the Borrower shall promptly inform 
ADB in advance of any proposed changes in the ownership or control of the Borrower or its 
assets, or any transaction or arrangement which will have or is likely to have such effect.

(c) Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB periodic reports on the execution of the Project, on the accomplishment of the 
targets and actions agreed between ADB and the Borrower, and on the operation and 
management of the Project facilities. Such reports shall be submitted in such form and in such 
detail and within such a period as ADB shall reasonably request, and shall indicate, among 
other things, progress made and problems encountered during the period under review, steps 
taken or proposed to be taken to remedy these problems, and proposed program of activities 
and expected progress during the following period.

(d) Promptly after completion of the Project, but in any event not later than 
three months thereafter or such later date as may be agreed for this purpose between the 
Borrower and ADB, the Borrower shall prepare and furnish to ADB a report, in such form and 
in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request, on the execution and initial operation of the 
Project, including its cost, the performance by the Borrower of its obligations under this Loan 
Agreement and the accomplishment of the purposes of the Loan.



15
Schedule 1

Section 5.06. Counterpart Obligations and Land Acquisition.
The Borrower shall make available, promptly as and when needed, the funds, facilities, 
services, land, and other resources as shall be necessary or required, in addition to the 
proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the Project and for the operation and maintenance 
of the Project facilities. The Borrower shall furnish to ADB, promptly at its request, evidence 
satisfactory to ADB that such funds, facilities, services, land, and other resources are available 
for purposes related to the Project.

Section 5.07, Work Schedules, Plans and Design Standards. 
The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance with plans, design 
standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods acceptable to the 
Borrower and ADB, as applicable. When required by ADB, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause 
to be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards, 
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made therein, 
in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request.

Section 5.08. General Undertakings. (a) The Borrower 
shall cause the Project to be carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity 
with sound financial, business and development practices. The Borrower shall in collaboration 
with ADB ensure that the Project adheres to ADB policies on anticorruption, core labor 
standards, environmental and social safeguards, gender, procurement and consulting 
services, disbursement and such other policy specified in the Loan Agreement.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its departments and 
agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities 
are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative policies and 
procedures.

Section 5. 09. Contractors and Consultants. In the carrying 
out of the Project, the Borrower shall cause competent and qualified consultants and 
contractors, acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, to be employed to an extent and upon terms 
and conditions satisfactory to the Borrower and ADB.

Section 5.10. Maintenance. The Borrower shall ensure that 
any facilities relevant to the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with 
sound operational and maintenance practices. The Borrower shall promptly as needed, make 
or cause to be made all necessary repairs and renewals thereof.

ARTICLE VI

Exemption from Taxation

Section 6. 01. Exemption from Taxation. The Borrower shall 
ensure that:

(a) the principal of, and service charge and other charges (including the 
Multilateral Development Bank Fee) on, the Loan are exempt from, and 



16
Schedule 1

are paid without deduction for, any taxes levied by, or in the territory of, 
the Borrower; and

(b) this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement are exempt from any 
taxes levied by, or in the territory of, the Borrower on or in connection 
with the execution, delivery or registration thereof.

ARTICLE VII

Suspension; Cancellation; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 7.01. Suspension by ADB. If any of the following 
events shall have occurred at any time after the date of this Loan Agreement and be continuing, 
ADB may by notice to the Borrower suspend in whole or in part the right of the Borrower to 
make withdrawals from the Loan Account:

(a) The Borrower shall have failed to make payment (notwithstanding the 
fact that such payment may have been made by any third party) of 
principal, service charge or any other charge (including the Multilateral 
Development Bank Fee) required (i) under the Loan Agreement; or (ii) 
under any other loan agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB; or 
(iii) in consequence of any guarantee or other financial obligation of any 
kind extended by ADB to any third party with the agreement of the 
Borrower.

(b) The Borrower shall have failed to perform any other of its obligations 
under this Loan Agreement

(c) The Project Executing Agency shall have failed to perform any of its 
obligations under the Project Agreement.

(d) ADB shall have suspended in whole or in part the right of the Borrower 
to make withdrawals under any other loan agreement with ADB because 
of a failure by the Borrower to perform any of its obligations under such 
loan agreement or any related guarantee agreement with ADB.

(e) A situation shall have arisen or developed which in the reasonable 
opinion of ADB will or may make it improbable that (i) the Project can be 
successfully carried out; or (ii) the Borrower or the Project Executing 
Agency will be able to perform any of its obligations under this Loan 
Agreement.

(f) The member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out shall have 
been suspended from membership in, or ceased to be a member of, 
ADB, or shall have delivered a notice to withdraw from ADB.



17
Schedule 1

(g) A representation made by the Borrower in or pursuant to this Loan 
Agreement, or any statement furnished in connection therewith and 
intended to be relied upon by ADB in making the Loan, shall have been 
incorrect in any material respect

(h) Any authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Project Executing Agency, the 
alienation or transfer of any of its aspects other than in the normal 
course of business, or for the suspension of its operations.

(i) The Borrower shall have been unable to pay its debts as they mature or 
any action or proceeding shall have been taken by the Borrower or by 
others whereby any of the assets of the Borrower shall or may be 
distributed among its creditors.

(j) The member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out or any 
other authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Borrower, the alienation or 
transfer of any of its assets other than in the normal course of business, 
or for the suspension of its operations.

(k) Any authority having jurisdiction shall have taken any action for the 
dissolution or disestablishment of the Borrower, the alienation or 
transfer of any of its assets other than in the normal course of business, 
or for the suspension of its operations.

(I) ADB shall have determined, with respect to any contract to be financed 
in full or in part out of the proceeds of the Loan, that corrupt, fraudulent, 
coercive or collusive practices, as determined by ADB, were engaged in 
by representatives of the Borrower or any beneficiary of the Loan during 
the procurement of goods and services, consultants’ selection or the 
execution of a contract, without the Borrower having taken timely and 
appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to remedy the situation; or ADB 
shall have determined that the procurement of any goods or services to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan is inconsistent with the 
relevant procedure set out in this Loan Agreement.

(m) Any other event specified in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section shall have occurred.

The right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account shall 
continue to be suspended in whole or in part, as the case may be, until the event which gave 
rise to such suspension shall have, in the reasonable opinion of ADB, ceased to exist or until 
ADB shall have notified the Borrower that the right to make withdrawals has been restored in 
whole or in part, whichever is the earlier.

Section 7.02. Cancellation by ADB. If (a) the right of the 
Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account shall have been suspended with respect 
to any amount of the Loan for a continuous period of 30 days; (b) at any time ADB determines, 
after consultation with the Borrower, that any amount of the Loan will not be required for the 



18
Schedule 1

purposes of the Project; (c) by the date specified in this Loan Agreement as the Loan Closing 
Date, an amount of the Loan shall remain unwithdrawn from the Loan Account; (d) at any time 
ADB determines, with respect to any contract to be financed in full or in partout of the proceeds 
of the Loan, that corrupt, fraudulent, coercive or collusive practices, as determined by ADB, 
were engaged in by representatives of the Borrower or any beneficiary of the Loan during the 
procurement of goods, works, services, consultants’ selection or the execution of a contract, 
without the Borrower having taken timely and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to remedy 
the situation; or (e) at any time, ADB determines that the procurement of any goods or services 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan is inconsistent with the relevant procedure set 
out in this Loan Agreement, ADB may by notice to the Borrower terminate the right of the 
Borrower to make withdrawals with respect to such amount Upon the giving of such notice, 
such amount of the Loan shall be cancelled.

Section 7.03. Cancellation by the Borrower. After consultation 
with ADB, the Borrower may by notice to ADB cancel any amount of the Loan which the 
Borrower shall not have withdrawn prior to the giving of such notice.

Section 7.04. Amounts Subject to Commitment Letters.
No suspension or cancellation shall apply to amounts subject to any commitment letter issued 
by ADB pursuant to Section 4.02 except as expressly provided in such commitment letter.

Section 7.05. Application of Cancellation. Except as ADB and 
the Borrower shall otherwise agree, any cancellation shall be applied pro rata to the remaining 
maturities of the principal amount of the Loan which shall mature after the date of such 
cancellation.

Section 7.06, Effectiveness of Provisions After Suspension or 
Cancellation. Notwithstanding any cancellation or suspension, all the provisions of this 
Loan Agreement shall continue in full force and effect except as specifically provided in this 
Article.

Section 7.07. Acceleration of Maturity. If any of the following 
events shall have occurred and continued for the period, if any, specified below, then at any 
subsequent time during the continuance thereof ADB may by notice to the Borrower declare 
the principal of the Loan then outstanding, together with all accrued service charge thereon, to 
be due and payable immediately, and upon any such declaration such principal and service 
charge shall become due and payable immediately:

(a) Any event specified in Section 7.01(a) shall have occurred and 
continued for a period of 30 days.

(b) Any event specified in Section 7.01(b) and Section 7.01(c) shall have 
occurred and continued for a period of 60 days after notice thereof shall 
have been given by ADB to the Borrower.

(c) Any event specified in Section 7.01(g), Section 7.01(h), Section 7.01 (i), 
and Section 7.01 (j) shall have occurred.



19
Schedule 1

(d) Any other event specified in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section shall have occurred and continued for the period, if any, 
specified in this Loan Agreement

ARTICLE VIII

Effectiveness; Termination

Section 8.01. Conditions Precedent to Effectiveness.
The Loan Agreement shall not become effective until evidence satisfactory to ADB shall have 
been furnished to ADB that:

(a) the execution and delivery of this Loan Agreement on behalf of the 
Borrower have been duly authorized or ratified by all necessary 
corporate and governmental action;

(b) the execution and delivery of the Project Agreement on behalf of the 
Project Executing Agency have been duly authorized or ratified by all 
necessary corporate and governmental action;

(c) the condition of the Borrower, as represented to ADB at the date of the 
Loan Agreement, has undergone no material adverse change between 
such date and the date agreed upon between the Borrower and ADB for 
the purposes of this Section, provided that ADB shall have requested 
such evidence; and

(d) all other events specified in this Loan Agreement as additional 
conditions to its effectiveness have occurred.

Sec tion 8.02. Legal Opinions. As part of the evidence to be 
furnished pursuant to Section 8.01, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be furnished, to 
ADB an opinion or opinions satisfactory to ADB of counsel acceptable to ADB showing:

(a) on behalf of the Borrower, that this Loan Agreement has been duly 
authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, the 
Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in accordance with 
its terms;

(b) on behalf of the Project Executing Agency, that the Project Agreement 
has been duly authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on 
behalf of, the Project Executing Agency and is legally binding upon the 
Project Executing Agency in accordance with its terms; and

(c) such other matters as shall be specified in this Loan Agreement.

Section 8.03. Effective Date. (a) Except as ADB and the
Borrower shall otherwise agree, this Loan Agreement shall come into force and effect on the 



20
Schedule 1

date of ADB’s notice to the Borrower notice of its acceptance of the evidence required by 
Section 8.01.

(b) If, before the Effective Date, any event shall have occurred which would 
have entitled ADB to suspend the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan 
Account if this Loan Agreement had been effective, ADB may postpone the dispatch of the 
notice referred to in paragraph (a) of this Section until such event shall have ceased to exist.

Section 8.04. Termination for Failure to Become Effective.
If this Loan Agreement shall not have come into force and effect by the date specified in this 
Loan Agreement for the purposes of this Section, this Loan Agreement and all obligations of 
the parties thereunder shall terminate, unless ADB, after consideration of the reasons for the 
delay, shall establish a later date for the purposes of this Section. ADB shall promptly notify 
the Borrower of such later date.

Section 8.05. Termination on Full Payment. If and when the 
entire principal amount of this Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and all service charges 
which shall have accrued on the Loan and all other charges (including the Management Fee) 
on the Loan shall have been paid, this Loan Agreement and all obligations of the parties 
thereunder shall forthwith terminate.

ARTICLE IX

Enforceability; Failure to Exercise Rights; Arbitration

Section 9.01. Enforceability. (a) The rights and obligations 
of ADB and the Borrower under this Loan Agreement shall be valid and enforceable in 
accordance with their terms and, where either the Borrower is a member, notwithstanding the 
law of any state or political or administrative subdivision thereof, to the contrary.

(b) Neither ADB nor the Borrower shall be entitled in any proceeding under 
this Article to assert any claim that any provision of this Loan Agreement is invalid or 
unenforceable because of any provision of the Articles of Agreement Establishing the Asian 
Development Bank or for any other reason.

Section 9.02. Failure to Exercise Rights. No delay in 
exercising, or omission to exercise, any right, power or remedy accruing to either party under 
this Loan Agreement upon any default shall impair any such right, power or remedy, or be 
construed to be a waiver thereof or an acquiescence in any such default; nor shall the action 
of such party in respect of any default, or any acquiescence in any default, affect or impair any 
right, power or remedy of such party in respect of any other or subsequent default.

Section 9.03. Arbitration. (a) Any controversy between the 
parties to this Loan Agreement and any claim by any such party against any other such party 
arising under this Loan Agreement which shall not be settled by agreement of the parties shall 
be submitted to arbitration by an Arbitral Tribunal as hereinafter provided.



21
Schedule 1

(b) The parties to such arbitration shall be ADB, on the one side, and the 
Borrower on the other side.

(c) The Arbitral Tribunal shall consist of three arbitrators appointed as 
follows: one arbitrator shall be appointed by ADB; a second arbitrator shall be appointed by 
the Borrower; and the third arbitrator (hereinafter sometimes called the Presiding Arbitrator) 
shall be appointed by agreement of the parties or, if they shall not agree, by the President of 
the International Court of Justice or, failing appointment by him, by the Secretary-General of 
the United Nations. If either side shall fail to appoint an arbitrator, the Presiding Arbitrator shall 
appoint such arbitrator. In case any arbitrator appointed in accordance with this Section shall 
resign, die or become unable to act, a successor arbitrator shall be appointed in the same 
manner as herein prescribed for the appointment of the original arbitrator and such successor 
shall have all the powers and duties of such original arbitrator.

(d) An arbitration proceeding may be instituted under this Section upon 
notice by the party instituting such proceeding to the other party or parties. Such notice shall 
contain a statement setting forth the nature of the controversy or claim to be submitted to 
arbitration, the nature of the relief sought and the name of the arbitrator appointed by the party 
instituting such proceeding. Within 30 days after the giving of such notice, the other party or 
parties shall notify the party instituting the proceeding of the name of the arbitrator appointed 
by such other party or parties.

(e) If within 60 days after the giving of the notice instituting the arbitration 
proceeding the parties shall not have agreed upon a Presiding Arbitrator, any party may 
request the appointment of a Presiding Arbitrator as provided in paragraph (c) of this Section.

(f) The Arbitral Tribunal shall convene at such time and place as shall be 
fixed by the Presiding Arbitrator. Thereafter, the Arbitral Tribunal shall determine where and 
when it shall sit

(g) The law to be applied by the Arbitral Tribunal shall be public international 
law, the sources of which shall be taken for these purposes to include:

(i) any relevant treaty obligations that are binding reciprocally on 
the parties;

(ii) the provisions of any international conventions and treaties 
(whether or not binding directly as such on the parties) generally 
recognized as having codified or ripened into binding rules of 
customary law applicable to states and international institutions, 
as appropriate;

(iii) other forms of international custom, including the practice of 
states and international institutions of such generality, 
consistency and duration as to create legal obligations; and

(iv) applicable general principles of law.



22
Schedule 1

(h) Subject to the provisions of this Section and except as the parties shall
otherwise agree, the Arbitral Tribunal shall decide all questions relating to its competence and 
shall determine its procedure. All decisions of the Arbitral Tribunal shall be by majority vote.

(i) The Arbitral Tribunal shall afford to all parties a fair hearing and shall
render its award in writing. Such award may be rendered by default. An award signed by a 
majority of the Arbitral Tribunal shall constitute the award of such Arbitral Tribunal. A signed 
counterpart of the award shall be transmitted to each party. Any such award rendered in 
accordance with the provisions of this Section shall be final and binding upon the parties to 
this Loan Agreement. Each party shall abide by and comply with any such award rendered by 
the Arbitral Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of this Section.

0) The parties shall fix the amount of the remuneration of the arbitrators
and such other persons as shall be required for the conduct of the arbitration proceedings. If 
the parties shall not agree on such amount before the Arbitral Tribunal shall convene, the 
Arbitral Tribunal shall fix such amount as shall be reasonable under the circumstances. Each 
party shall defray its own expenses in the arbitration proceedings. The costs of the Arbitral 
Tribunal shall be divided between and borne equally by ADB on the one side, and the Borrower 
on the other side. The Arbitral Tribunal shall determine any question concerning the division 
of the costs of the Arbitral Tribunal or the procedure for payment of such costs.

(k) The provisions for arbitration set forth in this Section shall be in lieu of
any other procedure for the settlement of controversies between the parties to this Loan 
Agreement any claim by either party against the other such party arising thereunder.

(I) If within 30 days after the counterparts of the award have been delivered
to the parties the award shall not be complied with, any party may enter judgment upon, or 
institute a proceeding to enforce, the award in any court of competent jurisdiction against any 
other party, and may enforce such judgment by execution or may pursue any other appropriate 
remedy against such other party for the enforcement of the award and the provisions of this 
Loan Agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this Section shall not authorize any entry of 
judgment or enforcement of the award against any party that is a member except as such 
procedure may be available otherwise than by reason of the provisions of this Section.

(m) Service of any notice or process in connection with any proceeding
under this Section or (to the extent that such remedy shall be available) in connection with any 
proceeding to enforce any award rendered pursuant to this Section may be made in the 
manner provided in Section 9.01. The parties to this Loan Agreement waive any and all other 
requirements for the service of any such notice or process.

ARTICLE X

Miscellaneous Provisions

Section 10.01. Notices and Requests. Any notice or request 
required or permitted to be given or made under this Loan Agreement; and any other 
agreement between any of the parties contemplated by this Loan Agreement shall be in writing.



23
Schedule 1

Except as otherwise provided in Section 8.03, such notice or request shall be deemed to have 
been duly given or made when it shall be delivered by hand or by mail, facsimile or electronic 
mail to the party to which it is required or permitted to be given or made at such party's address 
specified in this Loan Agreement or at such other address as such party shall have designated 
by notice to the party giving such notice or making such request.

Section 10.02. Authority to Take Action. Any action required or 
permitted to be taken, and any documents required or permitted to be executed, under this 
Loan Agreement, on behalf of the Borrower, as the case may be, may be taken or executed 
by the representative of the Borrower designated in this Loan Agreement for the purposes of 
this Section or any person thereunto authorized in writing by such representative. Any 
modification of the provisions of this Loan may be agreed to on behalf of the Borrower, by 
written instrument executed on behalf of the Borrower by the representative so designated or 
any person authorized in writing by such representative; provided that, in the opinion of such 
representative or other person, such modification is reasonable in the circumstances and will 
not substantially increase the obligations of the Borrower under this Loan Agreement. ADB 
may accept the execution by such representative or other person of any such instrument as 
conclusive evidence that in the opinion of such representative or other person any modification 
of the provisions of this Loan Agreement effected by such instrument is reasonable in the 
circumstances and will not substantially increase the obligations of the Borrower thereunder.

Section 10.03. Evidence of Authority. The Borrower shall 
furnish to ADB sufficient evidence of the authority of the person or persons who will, on behalf 
of the Borrower, take any action or execute any documents required or permitted to be taken 
or executed by the Borrower under this Loan Agreement, and the authenticated specimen 
signature of each such person.

Section 10.04. Withholding of Payments to Member on Shares, 
(a) If the member in whose territory the Project is to be carried out ceases to be a member 
of ADB, any amount due to the member for its shares repurchased by ADB shall be withheld 
so long as the member, its centra! bank or any of its agencies, or political or administrative 
subdivision remain liable to ADB under the Loan Agreement, or under any other loan 
agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB, and such amount may, at the option of ADB, 
be applied on any such liability as its matures.

(b) In the event of a distribution of the assets of ADB, the member in whose
territory the Project is to be carried out shall not be entitled to receive its share in such 
distribution until it has settled all of its obligations to ADB including its obligations under the 
Loan Agreement, or under any other loan agreement or guarantee agreement with ADB.

Section 10.05. Execution in Counterparts. The Loan
Agreement may be executed in several counterparts, each of which shall be an original.


26

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table").

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Service Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Service Charge” is for financing the service
charge on the Loan, during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such service charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook and detailed arrangements agreed upon 
between ADB and the Borrower.



27
Schedule 3

Retroactive Financing

6. The Loan proceeds shall not be used to finance any commitments or costs
incurred prior to the Effective Date unless approved by GCF in advance in writing.



28
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for GCF Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Civil Works - Irrigation and Roads 9,963,900 12.7% of total expenditure claimed

2 Service Charge 36,100 100% of amount due

TOTAL 10,000,000



29

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

1. The Borrower acknowledges and agrees that the Borrower has no right of
action, whether in contract, tort or under statute to the extent permitted by law, against GCF in 
respect of the ADB Green Climate Fund, the Project or any loss or damage arising out of ADB’s 
acts or omissions, or the acts of omissions of its officers, employees, agents or consultants 
under, or in connection with, this Loan Agreement.

2. The Borrower shall fully cooperate with ADB regarding any reviews, ad hoc
checks, verifications or evaluations by GCF.

3. In addition to the audit requirement under Section 4.02 of this Loan Agreement,
the Borrower acknowledges and agrees that ADB has the right to conduct financial audits of 
the Project, by an external auditor selected by ADB, if GCF has a concern as to the manner in 
which the Grant proceeds have been used; and shall fully cooperate with such audit. The 
Borrower shall bear the reasonable cost of such audit, if the audit finds that the Loan proceeds 
have not been used according to this Loan Agreement

4. The Borrower shall ensure that all necessary and applicable licenses, approvals
and consents, including those relating to intellectual property, to implement and carry out the 
Project and operate the Project facilities are valid for the duration of the Project.

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the activities related to the Project are
implemented in compliance with the laws of the Borrower and other laws applicable to it, 
including but not limited to intellectual property law, if and to the extent any such laws may be 
applicable to it.

6, The Borrower shall endeavor to acknowledge the visual identity of GCF in
funding the Project (e.g., through use of the GCF logo, in accordance with GCF’s branding 
guidelines, and appropriate references in reports, publications, information given to 
beneficiaries and news media, related publicity materials and any other forms of public 
information and the displaying of the GCF logo on the site of any infrastructure works). Any 
branding activities in support of GCF shall comply with GCF’s branding guidelines and be 
reviewed by the GCF Secretariat.























































LOAN NUMBER 3668-BHU(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Phuentsholing Township Development Project)

between

KINGDOM OF BHUTAN

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 3 JULY 2018

BHU 50165



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 3 July 2018 between KINGDOM OF BHUTAN 
(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by Druk Holdings and Investments
Limited (“DHI”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to DHI the proceeds of 
the loan provided for herein and the grant provided for the Grant Agreement (as hereinafter 
defined) (together, the “Financings") upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith (“Grant Agreement”), ADB
has agreed to make the proceeds of a grant in the amount of twenty-four million two hundred 
sixty thousand Dollars ($24,260,000) available to the Borrower for the purposes of financing 
the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreements of even date herewith between ADB and each of DHI and Construction 
Development Corporation Limited ("CDCL”);

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement" means the project agreements of even date 
herewith between ADB and each of DHI and CDCL, as each such 
agreement may be amended from time to time; and such project 
agreement includes all schedules to the project agreement;

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the terms "DHI” and “CDCL”.



2

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines" means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) "Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Financings aS described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 
to this Loan Agreement;

(c) "Environmental Impact Assessment” or “EIA” means the environmental 
impact assessment for the Project, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(d) "Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means the environmental 
management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the EIA;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
theSPS;

(f) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(g) "Ngultrum” means the Borrower’s currency;

(h) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(i) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
24 July 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to. time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(j) “Project Administration Manual” or “PAM" means the Project’s 
administration manual for the Project dated 24 July 2017 and agreed 
between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the 
Borrower and ADB;

(k) “Project Advisory Committee” or "PAC” means the Project's advisory 
committee chaired by DHI’s Chief Executive Officer and comprising 
representatives as stated in the PAM;

(I) “Project Implementation Unit" or “PIU" means the Project 
implementation unit comprising persons as stated in the PAM;



3

(m) “Project Management Unit” or “PMU” means the Project management 
unit comprising persons as stated in the PAM;

(n) "Safeguard Policy Statement" or “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(o) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventive actions;

(p) “Strategic Action Plan” or “SAP" means the strategic action plan for 
sustainable township management in form and substance acceptable 
to ADB referred to in paragraph 5 of Schedule 5 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(q) “Subsidiary Financing Agreement” means the agreement referred to in 
Section 3.01 of this Loan Agreement and Section 3.01 of the Grant 
Agreement;

(r) “Subsidiary Loan" means the loan from the Borrower to CDCL under 
the Subsidiary Financing Agreement; and

. (s) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Financings, including services such as drilling or 
mapping, and project related services that are provided as part of a 
single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting 
Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of twenty-eight million seven hundred forty thousand 
Dollars ($28,740,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24. years, and 
additionally, a grace period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the 
amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.



4

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan
shall be payable semiannually on 1 February and 1 August in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall relend the proceeds of the
Loan in Ngultrum to DHI under a Subsidiary Financing Agreement upon terms and conditions 
satisfactory to ADB (and DHI shall provide same to CDCL). Except as ADB shall otherwise 
agree, the terms for relending the proceeds of the Loan shall include interest at the rate of 
1% per annum during the grace period and 2.55% per annum thereafter, on the amount of 
the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time, and a term of 
32 years including a grace period of 8 years. The Borrower shall bear the risk associated 
with exchange mismatch between the Loan and the Subsidiary Loan.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Works 
and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Works and Consulting Services which are supplied from such member 
countries of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to 
time as eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Works and Consulting Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 December 2025 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable DHI and CDCL to perform their respective obligations under 
the Project Agreements, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with 
the performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Financing Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower 
and ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Financing Agreement 
shall be assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under 
the Grant Agreement; and

(b) the Borrower or DHI shall have failed to perform any of their respective 
obligations under the Subsidiary Financing Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following are specified as additional events for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.



6

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness 
other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan 
Agreement shall have been fulfilled; and .

(b) the Subsidiary Financing Agreement, in form and substance 
satisfactory to ADB, shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower and DHI and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or 
opinions to be furnished to ADB: that the Subsidiary Financing Agreement has been duly 
authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of each of the Borrower and 
DHI and is legally binding upon each of them in accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated 
as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Royal Government of Bhutan
Thimphu, Bhutan



7

Facsimile Number:

+975 2 330-113

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632) 636-2293.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

LYONPO NAMGAY DORJI 
Minister

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

KANOKPAN LAO-ARAYA 
Country Director 

Bhutan Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to sustainably increase the urban area of
Phuentsholing.

2. The Project shall comprise (i) development of climate and flood resilient land;
(ii) construction of municipal infrastructure; and (iii) installation of sustainable township 
management systems.

3. Consulting Services shall be provided in connection with the above activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 June 2025.



Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table"). (Reference to. “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works and Consulting 
Services, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

(USD) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works 10,360,000 57% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 7,420,000 98% of total expenditure claimed

3 Unallocated 10,960,000

TOTAL 28,740,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to and
governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. , All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Works

4. Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods set forth
below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) Force Account; and

(c) Shopping.

Conditions for Award of Contract

5. CDCL shall not award any Works contract which involves environmental
impacts until:

(a) The Borrower’s National Environment Commission has granted the 
final approval of the EIA; and

(b) CDCL has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the 
Works contract.

Consulting Services

6. The Borrower shall apply Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting
Services.

7. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants for independent
environmental monitoring expert, urban management advisor and investment promotion 



15
Schedule 4

advisor in accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual 
consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

8. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Works procured (including without
limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured or 
incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from 
the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in subparagraph (a) of this 
paragraph.

9. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

10. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and 
ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower shall ensure that DHI and CDCL employ sufficient staff for the
PMU and PIU for the duration of the Project, with adequate and relevant expertise in the field 
of project management, financial management, engineering, procurement, and 
environmental and social safeguards implementation. The PMU Project Director and PIU 
Project Director shall hold the position not less than the rank of Class 1 engineer, or 
equivalent, Officers, unless otherwise acceptable to.ADB.

3. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall (a) ensure that the majority of counterpart
staff assigned to the PMU and PIU are assigned to the Project on a full-time basis; and (b) 
undertake best efforts to ensure that they remain in their positions for a reasonable period of 
time, and that staff replacements do not unduly disrupt implementation of the Project. The 
Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall provide ADB reasonable opportunity to comment on any 
proposed appointment of persons to key positions in the PMU and PIU, including the Project 
Director for the PMU and the Project Directors for PIU.

4. The Borrower shall remain fully committed to the Project and shall ensure that
all its ministries, agencies and divisions involved in the implementation of the Project give 
their full cooperation to ensure smooth implementation of the Project. Specifically, the 
Borrower shall cause DHI and CDCL to give full, timely and efficient cooperation in obtaining 
any licenses, permits or approvals required in connection with infrastructure work. The 
Borrower shall also ensure that Bhutan Power Corporation and Bhutan Telecom will provide 
the necessary connections in the developed areas.

Strategic Action Plan

5. Within 36 months of the Effective Date, the Borrower though DHI shall
develop and finalize, and ensure approval by the relevant government agency and 
implementation of, the SAP, which shall include, among other matters, (i) the required legal, 
policy and operational frameworks for operation of the new township that will establish 
institutional arrangements for sustainable township management, including the required 
approval process, and the allocation of roles and responsibilities between the municipality 
and CDCL; (ii) the allocation of sufficient municipal and CDCL human resources; (iii) a plan 
on the development of the surrounding area adjacent to the newly developed township, 
including plans for raising grounds level for the protection for surface flooding; and (tv) a time 
bound plan for the operation and maintenance of the newly developed township.



17
Schedule 5

Environment

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause DHI and CDCL to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Recipient relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the EIA and the EMP, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 
under the related Works contract.

8. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not involve any involuntary
resettlement impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event the Project involves any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Indigenous Peoples

9. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not involve any indigenous
peoples’ impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event the Project involves any such 
impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with 
the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

10. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under 
the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, 
particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set 
forth above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the principles of gender equality aimed at
increasing Project benefits, and impact on women in the Project area are followed during 
implementation of the Project. These include (a) equal pay to men and women for work of 
equal value; (b) enabling working conditions for women workers; and (c) taking necessary 



18
Schedule 5

actions to encourage women living in the Project area to participate in the design and 
implementation of Project activities.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. The Borrower shall make available, or cause DHI and CDCL to make
available, necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause DHI and CDCL to ensure, that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the EIA 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts or affected people 
during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that arise during construction, 
implementation or operation of the Project that were not considered in 
the EIA and the EMP;

(d) ■ adequately record the condition, of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Borrower shall to do the following:

(a) submit bi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the EIA and the EMP, promptly inform ADB 
of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of 
the event and proposed corrective action plan;

(c) no later than six months of the Effective Date, engage qualified and 
experienced external experts or qualified NGO[sj under a selection 
process and terms of reference acceptable to ADB, to verify 



19
Schedule 5

information produced through the Project monitoring process, and 
facilitate the carrying out of any verification activities by such external 
experts; and

(d) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

15. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Financings are used to
finance any activity included in the list of' prohibited investment activities provided in 
Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Counterpart Support

16. The Borrower through DHI will provide all counterpart funds, land and facilities
required for timely and effective implementation of the Project, including without limitation, 
any funds required to (a) to meet any shortfall between cost and revenues for the operation 
and maintenance of the facilities developed under the Project, (b) to mitigate any unforeseen 
environmental and social impacts, and (c) to meet additional costs arising from design 
changes, price escalation in construction costs and/or unforeseen circumstances. The 
Borrower will make the resources thus required available on an annual basis for each fiscal 
year. In addition to the foregoing, the. Borrower shall ensure that DHI and CDCL have 
sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works and/or Consulting Services 
contract.

Governance and Corruption

17. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption
Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to 
investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

Operation and Maintenance

19. The Borrower shall develop and implement a program for regular and periodic
maintenance of the facilities to be financed by the Project in accordance with international 
best practices acceptable to ADB, and make adequate resources available, through 
budgetary allocations or otherwise, for this purpose.



20
Schedule 5

Exemption of Import Duties

20. The Borrower shall exempt the cost of Works contracts from otherwise
applicable customs duties.





















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 6027-PAK (COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Punjab Water Resources Management Projects) 

between

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN 

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED15 T.olo

PAK 51036



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated riLloXo between ISLAMIC REPUBLIC 

OF PAKISTAN (“Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan under an ADB project 
readiness financing (“PRF") to finance preparatory activities for prospective projects ("PRF 
Activities”) described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement; and

(B) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) The term "Project" wherever it appears in the Loan Regulations as a 
defined term, shall be substituted by the term "PRF Activities".

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency" wherever it appears in the Loan 
Regulations as a defined term, shall be substituted by the term "PRF 
Executing Agency”.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Amortization Schedule" means the amortization schedule for 
repayment of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan (in the event 
that the PRF Loan is not refinanced by ADB), as set forth in Schedule 2 
to this Loan Agreement;

(b) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



2

(c) “Ensuing Loan Agreement" means the loan agreement to be entered 
into between the Borrower and ADB for an Ensuing Project which also 
provides for refinancing of the Loan;

(d) "Ensuing Project(s)" means the prospective project(s) to be financed by 
ADB, that satisfy the selection criteria set forth in Schedule 1;

(e) "Existing Loan Agreement" means the loan agreement entered into 
between the Borrower and ADB for an ongoing project financed by ADB, 
an amendment of which provides for refinancing of the Loan;

(f) "Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(g) "Nonconsulting Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(h) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the PRF Activities 
dated 18 November 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB. 
as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(i) “PRF Executing Agency" within the meaning of the Loan Regulations 
means the Punjab Irrigation Department of the Government of Punjab 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for 
the carrying out of the PRF Activities;

(j) “PRF Implementing Agencies" means the Punjab Irrigation Department 
and the Punjab Agriculture Department of the Government of Punjab, or 
any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(k) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the PRF Activities 
dated 18 November 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, 
as updated from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, 
the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(I) "Procurement Policy" means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(m) "Procurement Regulations’ means ADB's Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(n) "Refinancing Date" means the date no later than the first Principal 
Payment Date that is either (i) the effective date of the Ensuing Loan 
Agreement; (ii) the effective date of the amended Existing Loan 
Agreement; or (iii) such other date as may from time to time be agreed 
between the Borrower and ADB;



3

(o) “Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services; and

(p) “SPS" means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009).

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of eight million three hundred and twenty thousand 
Dollars ($8,320,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the Amortization 
Schedule.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. Interest on the Loan shall be payable semiannually on 
1 April and 1 October in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. In the event that the Loan is refinanced by ADB pursuant 
to an Ensuing Loan Agreement or an Existing Loan Agreement, on the Refinancing Date:

(a) the Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn 
from the Loan Account along with any interest accrued hereunder in 
accordance with the terms of the Ensuing Loan Agreement or the 
Existing Loan Agreement; and

(b) the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account 
shall terminate and any unwithdrawn amount of the Loan shall be 
cancelled.



4

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures relating to the PRF Activities in accordance 
with the provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the PRF Activities, the Borrower 
shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall or shall cause the PRF
Executing Agency to (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the PRF Activities; (ii) 
prepare annual financial statements for the PRF Activities in accordance with financial 
reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited annually 
by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are 
acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of 
each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on 
the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which 
sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the PRF Activities that were identified in the 
course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each 
related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management 
letter, all in the English language, and such other information concerning these documents and 
the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the PRF 
Activities and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB's website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the PRF Activities and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate 



5

to the PRE Activities with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, 
and shall authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only 
in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise 
agree.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the PRF Activities and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6.01. The Secretary, Economic Affairs Division, Ministry of 
Economic Affairs of the Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the 
purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

The Secretary
Economic Affairs Division
Ministry of Economic Affairs
Islamabad, Pakistan

Facsimile Number:

(92-51)910-4016.



6

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(63-2) 8636-2444 
(63-2) 8636-2484.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

By____
DR.

AKI STAN

Economic airs Division 
Ministry of Economic Affairs

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC

VAIZ ABBAS 
S^cfetary

ASIAN DEVE PMENT BANK

By
XIAOHONG YANG 

Country Director 
Pakistan Resident Mission



7

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the PRF Activities

1. The PRF Activities shall comprise:

(a) project preparatory activities in the form of feasibility studies and due 
diligence assessments, including preliminary engineering design; cost 
estimates: technical, financial, integrity, economic, and socioeconomic 
analysis; environmental analysis; and social impact assessment;

(b) detailed engineering design, and preparation of environmental and 
social safeguards planning documents;

(c) advance procurement actions, including preparation of bidding 
documents and supporting the bidding process until contract award; and

(d) capacity development for the PRF Executing Agency and PRF 
Implementing Agencies in PRF project preparation and implementation 
including procurement, contract management, financial management, 
safeguards planning and monitoring, and gender aspects.

2. Unless otherwise agreed between the Borrower and ADB, the PRF Activities
are expected to support preparation of the Ensuing Projects that satisfy the following selection 
criteria:

(a) Relevance: the project is in line with the overall objective of the PRF that 
is to (i) meet the policies and strategies of the national and provincial 
governments, and ADB. including sector operational plans, country 
partnership strategy and is included in the country operations business 
plan; and (ii) ensure high implementation readiness for the ensuing 
projects;

(b) Technical: the technical design will meet relevant guidelines and 
regulations of the Borrower. The technical feasibility will be assessed 
through detailed examination of the project s compatibility with local 
conditions, including current and projected climate variables, availability 
of water sources, proximity to the residents, and available land for 
project facilities. Alternative design options will be identified and 
assessed;

(c) Governance: both the executing agency and the implementing agency 
of the proposed project have an established capacity to administer and 
implement externally-funded projects including those financed by ADB. 
Both the agencies have adequate financial management and 
procurement capacity to manage activities related to the preparation of 
the proposed projects supported under the PRF;



8

(d) Safeguards: project preparation and design activities for the project 
supported through the PRF are expected to have no environmental or 
social impacts, as the project will only finance consulting services. The 
proposed project will fully meet the requirements of the SPS.

3. The PRF Activities are expected to be completed by 31 December 2023.



9

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date.



* The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations. 
2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date In accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date.

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal.



11

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to "Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charges" is for financing interest
charges on the Loan during the implementation period of the PRF Activities. ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due. of such interest charges.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, in consultation with the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, 
to the extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the 
Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion 
of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, In consultation with 
the Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($)
Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1 Project Management 430,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 5,950,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*
3 Interest Charges 470,000 100% of amounts due
4 Unallocated 1,470, 000

TOTAL 8,320,000



13

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure, and cause the PRF Executing Agency and PRF
Implementing Agencies to ensure, that the PRF Activities are implemented in accordance with 
the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

Safeguards

2. The Borrower shall ensure, and cause the PRF Executing Agency and PRF
Implementing Agencies to ensure, that the PRF Activities do not have any environmental, 
indigenous peoples or involuntary resettlement impacts, all within the meaning of the SPS.

Prohibited List of Investments

3. The Borrower shall ensure, and cause the PRF Executing Agency and PRF
Implementing Agencies to ensure, that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity 
included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Procurement

4. The Borrower and the PRF Executing Agency shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Consulting Services is carried out in accordance with 
the Procurement Policy and the Procurement Regulations;

(b) Consulting Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Consulting Services obtained (including all computer hardware,
software and systems, whether separately procured or incorporated 
within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party; 
and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of Consulting Services contain 
appropriate representations, warranties and. if appropriate, indemnities 
from the contractor, supplier, consultant or service provider with respect 
to the matters referred to in this subparagraph.



14
Schedule 4

Governance and Anticorruption

5. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the PRF Executing Agency and
PRF Implementing Agencies to (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998, as 
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
PRF Activities; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

6. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the PRF Executing Agency and
PRF Implementing Agencies to ensure, that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB 
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the PRF Executing Agency, PRF 
Implementing Agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers 
as they relate to the PRF Activities.



























































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3877-CAM: Irrigated Agricuture Improvement Project 


LOAN NUMBER 3877-CAM(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

{Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 5 DECEMBER 2019

CAM 51159



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 5 December 2019 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA ("Borrower11) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("ADB Grant Agreement"), ADB has agreed to provide a grant in the amount of two million 
one hundred and sixty thousand Dollars ($2,160,000) from ADB's Special Funds resources to 
assist in financing a part of the Project;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("HLTF Grant Agreement "), ADB has agreed to administer a grant from the High-Level 
Technology Fund ("HLTF’) in the amount equivalent to one million and six hundred thousand 
Dollars ($1,600,000) for the purpose of cofinancing certain activities under the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows;

ARTICLE I 

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (Loan Regulations’1), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(b) “Data Center" means the National Water Resources Data Management 
Center to be established in MOWRAM, as further described in the PAM;



2

(c) “EIA" means the environmental impact assessment for the Stung Chinit 
South Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(d) "EMP"' means the environmental management plan for each Subproject, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the EIA or IEE, as the case 
may be;

(e) 'Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) "FWUC1" means farmer water user communities;

(g) J'GAPJ" means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 
updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower, and cleared 
by ADB;

(h) ' Goods1’ means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(I) "HIV/AIDS" means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

0) "IBBA” means the Important Bird and Biodiversity Area, as more fully 
described in the PAM;

(k) "IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Subprojects 
other that Stung Chinit South Subproject, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(I) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(m) "Kam pi ng Pouy Subproject” means a subproject located in Battambang
province, as further described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement and 
the PAM;

(n) "Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(o) "MOWRAM" means the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology 
of the Borrower or any successor thereto;

(p) "Nonconsulting Services’" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



3

(q) "O&M" means operation and maintenance;

(r) PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 7 
October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(s) "Procurement Manual" means the Procurement Manual under the 
standard operating procedures prepared by the Borrower and endorsed 
by ADB, which sets forth the procurement-related policies and 
procedures for externally-financed projects and programs;

(t) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
7 October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB 
(which include the Standard Operating Procedures and the 
Procurement Manual as updated from time to time);

(u) 'Procurement Policy* means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

{v) ^Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services {2017, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Project Executing Agency1’ for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of the Loan Regulations means MOWRAM or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for carrying cut of the Project;

(x) “Project facilities” means ail facilities incorporating or using Goods or 
Works;

(y) “RP’1 means the resettlement plan for the Kamping Pouy Subproject,
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the BMP and the RP, including 
any corrective and preventative actions;

(aa) ’Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(bb) "SPS* means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(cc) "SRP” means sustainable rice platform, a multi-stakeholder platform 
established by the United Nations Environment Program and the 
International Rice Research Institute in December 2011;



4

{dd) “Standard Operating Procedures” means the Standard Operating 
Procedures of the Borrower (sub-decree no. 74 ANK.BK dated 22 May 
2012, as amended from time to time) providing the procedures 
applicable to all externally financed projects and programs;

(ee) "Stung Chinit South Subproject" means the subproject located in 
Kampong Thom province, as further described in Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement and the PAM;

(ff) ‘ Subproject' means a subproject under the Project, as further described
in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement and the PAM;

(gg) ‘Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract; and

(hh) WRIS” means the water resources information system to be developed 
under the Project, as further described in the PAM.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2 01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADBJs
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred seventeen million Dollars 
($117,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.02 The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 June and 1 December in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.



5

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03{a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Bo Tower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02 (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agency (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) pre pa re annual financial 
statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; 
(iii) have such financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, In accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinion(s) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) 
furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request



6

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of AD B’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADBJs website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon AD B’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8 01(m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the ADB Grant Agreement or the HLTF Grant Agreement.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8 07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the events 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

{a) the ADB Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement and the HLTF Grant Agreement) shall have been 
fulfilled; and

(b) the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to 



7

their effectiveness (other then a condition requiring the effectiveness of 
this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02 The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9 02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the ADB Grant Agreement and the HLTF Grant Agreement shall have 
each been duly authorized, executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and are legally 
binding in accordance with their terms.

Section 6. 03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance
St. 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

+355 23 427-798
+855 23 438-424

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers.

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF

By_________
H.E. DR. A^N PORNMONIROTH

Deputy Prime Minister 
Minister of Economy and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

SUNNIYA DURRANI-JAMAL
Country Director 

Cambodia Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1, The objective of the Project is to enhance water and agriculture productivity in
the provinces of Battambang, Kampong Cham, Kampong Thom and Takeo {“Project Areas11).

2. The Project shall comprise the following:

Component 1: Efficiency and climate resilience of irrigation systems 
enhanced - this includes the modernization and climate-proofing of four 
irrigation Subprojects in each of the Project Areas through (a) remodeling and 
improving reservoir embankment, pumping stations, canals and drains as well 
as appurtenant structures; (b) improving water sharing arrangements between 
linked systems; (c) strengthening existing FWUCs and forming additional 
FWUCs to improve the sustain ability of the operations and maintenance 
scheme; (d) piloting an irrigation asset management information system to 
improve operations and maintenance budgeting and procedures; and (e) 
formulating an SRP for the Stung Chinit South Subproject. The Subprojects to 
be financed under this Component comprise:

(a) Kamping Pouy Subproject in Battambang province;

(b) Prek Po Subproject in Kampong Cham province;

(c) Stung Chinit South Subproject in Kampong Thom province; and

(d) Canal 15 Subproject in Takec Province.

Component 2: Water resources management improved - this includes (a) 
installing hydromet stations; (b) capacity training for government staff, including 
MOWRAM and fts provincial departments, and FWUCs; (c) establishing a Data 
Center; and (d) developing a WRIS.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2024.





Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table”). (Reference to ‘'Category1' in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each Hem of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed in the territory of the Borrower.

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated for 

ADB 
Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan
Account

1 Works (Stung Chinit South 
Subproject)

31,100,000 93.5% of total expenditure claimed

2 Works (Other Subprojects) 68,070,000 100% of total expenditures claimed

3 Consulting Services (the 
Data Center)

580,000 26.6% of total expenditures claimed*

4 Consulting Services 
(Others)

6,550,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*

5 Goods 7,450.000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

a
Capacity building, 
incremental operating 
costs

3,250,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

TOTAL 117,000,000
'AALaL-a / ■. ____ ____________ _^1.'■. ■■!



14

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project is implemented
in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change 
to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower, through 
MOWRAM, and ADB, In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower shall cause MQWRAM to ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in ths Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
AD B’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM not to award any Works contracts which
involves environmental impacts until MOWRAM has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the EIA or the I EE, as the case may be, 
from the Borrower’s relevant authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

4. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM not to award any Works contracts for a
Subproject involving involuntary resettlement impacts until the Borrower has prepared and 



15

Schedule 4

submitted to ADB the final RP based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained ADBs 
clearance of such RP.

Environment

5. The Borrower shall cause MOW RAM to ensure that the preparation, design,
construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project 
facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EIA or the 1EE, as the case may be, the EMP, and any corrective 
or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Reports

6. For the Stung Chinit South Subproject, the Borrower shall, and shall cause
MOWRAM to, ensure that during and after the project implementation period, it (a) will not 
extend or permit the extension of any canals into the IBBA; and (b) will not permit any third 
party pumping from command area canals.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that all land and ail rights-of-
way required for the Kamping Pouy Subproject and the Project facilities to be developed under 
the Kamping Pouy Subproject are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with 
the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement 
activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the RP based on all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition 
and involuntary resettlement; (b) the provisions of SPS relating to Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguards; and (c) any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Reports.

8. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
the RP, the Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with the Kamping Pouy Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP.

9. If voluntary land donation or negotiated settlement is required, the Borrower
shall cause MQWRAM to ensure that such voluntary land donation or negotiated settlement 
shall be carried out in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and 
SPS.

Indigenous Peoples and Involuntary Resettlement for Concerned Subprojects

10. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project does not have
any indigenous peoples impacts and the Subprojects other than the Kamping Pouy Subproject 
do not have any involuntary resettlement impacts, both within the meaning of the SPS. In the 
event that the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take all steps required 



16

Schedule 4

to ensure that the Project or any concerned Subproject complies with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

11. The Borrower shall ensure that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism
acceptable to ADB is established at the project management unit in accordance with the 
provisions of the EIA, EMP and RP, within the timeframes specified in the relevant EIA, IEE, 
EMP and RP, to consider safeguards complaints.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. T he Bo rro wer shall make availa ble necessa ry bu d g eta ry a n d h uma n resou rces
to fully implement any EMP and RP

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall, and shall cause MOWRAM to, ensure that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the EIA 
or the IEE, the EMP and the RP (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the Project Executing Agency with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the EIA or the IEE, the EMP, and 
the RP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Bo Tower shall, and shall cause MOWRAM to, do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB within one 
month after the reporting period at the end of each half of the calendar 
year, and disclose relevant information from such reports to affected 
persons promptly upon submission,

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the EIA or the IEE, the EMP and RP, promptly inform 
ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description 
of the event and proposed corrective action plan in accordance with the 
SPS;



17

Schedule 4

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP and the RP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach; and

(d) prior to the commencement of the Works, prepare and submit to ADB a 
handover letter which certifies that all activities, measures and 
requirements set forth in the RP are duly accomplished.

Prohibited List of Investments

15. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

16. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the core labor standards
and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and 
contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: 
(a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable 
workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers 
tn respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the 
workers from developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and 
protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) 
disseminate information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

17, The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to strictly monitor compliance with the
requirements set forth in paragraph 16 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

18. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with
its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors 
to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for 
implementation of the GAP; and(d) progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported 
to ADB using ADB's template.

Counterpart Support

19. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds for the Project are provided
on a timely basis. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project 
Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Goods, Works, 
Goods and Services contract.



18

Schedule 4

Operation and Maintenance of Project Facilities

20. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project facilities are
operated and maintained appropriately and in accordance with the standards and 
requirements prescribed by the applicable taws and regulations of the Borrower, and that 
adequate budgetary and other resources are promptly provided for such operation and 
maintenance.

Water Resources Management Scholarship. Internship, Training and Mentoring Program

21. The Borrower shall ensure compliance with the candidates’ selection criteria for
the water resources management program, as further specified in the PAM.

Governance and Anticornuption

22. The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1993, as
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directlyr or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

23, The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing 
agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate 
to the Project.




































































51242-002: Resilient Community Development Project


LOAN NUMBER 3864-MYA(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Resilient Community Development Project)

between

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED £

MYA51242



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated £ between THE
REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
(“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“ADF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s 
Special Funds resources in the amount often million Dollars ($10,000,000) (“ADF Grant”) for 
the purposes of the Resilient Community Development Project (“Project”), described in 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“JFPR Grant Agreement), ADB has agreed to administer a grant from the Japan Fund 
for Poverty Reduction (“JFPR”) in the amount of three million Dollars ($3,000,000) (the “JFPR 
Grant”) for the purpose of cofinancing certain expenditures under the Project;

(C) by a grant agreement to be entered into between the Borrower and ADB 
(“EU Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to administer a grant from the Asia Investment 
Facility of the European Union (EU), in the amount of twenty-four million two hundred fifty 
thousand Euros (€24,250,000) (“EU Grant”) for the purpose of cofinancing certain 
expenditures under the Project;

(D) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein; and

(F) the Project will be carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, 
and Irrigation (“MOALI”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to MOALI the 
proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.



2

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “CDR” means climate and disaster risk;

(b) “Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(c) “CPF” means the community participation framework for the Project, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(d) “DRD” means the Borrower’s Department of Rural Development within 
MOALI or any successor thereto;

(e) “EARF” means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project which includes the ECOP and a generic environmental 
management plan, including any updates thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(f) “ECOP” means environmental codes of practice for a Subproject with 
minimum or minor impacts;

(g) “EGDF” means the ethnic group development framework for the Project, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(h) “EGDP” means an ethnic group development plan for a Subproject, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the EGDF;

(i) “EIA or IEE Type Project” means a project determined by the Ministry of 
Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation to have adverse 
impacts as per categorization criteria defined in Annex 1 of the 
Notification No. 616/2015 on environmental impact assessment 
procedure of the Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar;

(j) “EMP” means an environmental management plan for a Subproject, 
including any update thereto;

(k) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter Vt Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(I) “GESIAP” means the gender equity and social inclusion action plan 
prepared for the Project, including any update thereto, and agreed 
between the Borrower and ADB;



3

(m) “Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(n) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(o) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) “MOALI” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Irrigation;

(q) “Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(r) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
3 October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(s) “PIU” means a project implementation unit established at the township 
cluster level;

(t) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
3 October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(u) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(v) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Project Executing Agency” means the MOALI or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the overall supervision and 
execution of the Project;

(x) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be provided, constructed, 
operated, upgraded and maintained under the Project;

(y) Project Implementing Agency” means the DRD or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the day-to-day 
implementation of the Project;

V



4

(z) “Project Operations Manual” means the project operations manual, 
comprising sub-manuals (including sub-manuals on resilient 
communities infrastructure, resilient community livelihoods, community 
finance and procurement, implementing mechanism and project 
monitoring and evaluation), to guide the implementation of the 
Subprojects, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(aa) “Project Townships and Villages” means the townships and villages and
such other regions of the Borrower which may from time to time be 
designated as Project Townships and Villages by agreement between 
the Borrower and ADB;

(bb) Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(cc) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EARF, EMP, ECOP, CPF, 
EGDF and EGDP (as applicable), including any corrective and 
preventative actions;

(dd) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(ee) “Subproject” means a subproject as described in Output 1 and Output 2 
which is to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and which meets 
the selection and eligibility criteria set out in paragraph 6 of Schedule 4 
below and in the PAM;

(ff) “Subproject facilities” means, in respect of a Subproject, the equipment 
to be provided and the facilities to be installed, constructed, operated, 
upgraded and maintained under that Subproject;

(gg) “VDP” means a village development plan;

(hh) “VDP Process” means a VDP process led by the Project Implementing 
Agency which starts at the village level, then aggregates at village tract 
level, and informs the township level and which takes into account the 
climate risk and vulnerability assessments and market opportunity 
assessment in the process of prioritization of infrastructure and 
livelihood investments;

(ii) “Village Tract” means a group of villages in a contiguous territory;

(jj) “VTDSC” means a village tract development support committee 
responsible for community planning process and subproject cycle at the 
village tract level; and

(kk) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 



5

related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred eighty-five million Dollars 
($185,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.



6

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. (a) Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of
Goods, Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(i) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(ii) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.

(b) For purposes of subparagraph (a)(ii), items to be procured may also be 
procured under the Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Section 3. 05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 March 2027 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this'Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual consolidated financial statements for 
the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such 
financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, 
experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a 
report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the 
Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control 
of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no 
later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time 
reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



7

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligation under the 
ADF Grant Agreement, JFPR Grant Agreement or EU Grant Agreement; 
and

(b) the ADF Grant, JFPR Grant or the EU Grant shall have become liable 
for suspension or cancellation.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of the 
events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition 
requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been 
fulfilled;

(b) the JFPR Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a 



8

condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have 
been fulfilled; and

(c) the EU Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition 
requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been 
fulfilled.

Sec tion 6.02. The following are specified as additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms;

(b) the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon thd 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(c) the EU Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms.

Section 6. 03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Borrower’s Union Minister or Deputy Minister of 
Planning and Finance is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of 
Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Planning, Finance and Industry
Building No. 26 Nay Pyi Taw
The Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Facsimile Number:

+95 67 410198



9

For ADB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 8636-2444.



10

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF 
MYANMAR

SI SI PYONE 
Director General 

Treasury Department 
Ministry of Planning, Finance 

and Industry

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
NEWIN SINSIRI
Country Director 

Myanmar Resident Mission



11

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to improve the standard of living and resilience
of selected communities.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) Output 1: development of climate and disaster resilient community 
infrastructure subprojects, such as village access or farm roads, small 
bridges, water supply, electric grid connections and multipurpose 
centers, identified through the VDP process, based on selection criteria 
and funded through block grants;

(b) Output 2: development of resilient livelihood activities for poor men and 
women in the lowest four deciles of poor and vulnerable households in 
their villages, through livelihood subprojects identified through the VDP 
process, funded through block grants, such as new or improved climate­
smart agriculture, livestock, fisheries activities, among others; provision 
of access to vocational training particular for women and youth; and 
provision of training to poor households above the lowest four deciles to 
adapt to CDR; and

(c) Output 3: strengthening of the institutional and organizational capacity 
of communities and government by further developing their VDP 
process and building their capacity to assist villagers, through the 
formation of a DRD training unit along with associated training curricula 
in the areas of community-based planning, resilience building, gender, 
leadership and livelihood development, among others; and knowledge 
centers to promote CDR in agriculture, livestock, fishery and rural 
development.

3. The Project includes a disaster contingency feature. In the event of a disaster
affecting an entire township, and upon the request of the Project Executing Agency and 
approval by ADB, funds from the subsequent cycle of community subproject implementation 
may be advanced for reconstruction of the damaged infrastructure and recovery of livelihoods. 
The selection of infrastructure and livelihood subprojects will follow similar participatory 
processes and criteria as set out in Outputs 1 and 2 described above and detailed in the PAM.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 September 2026.


SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



15
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 

Financing 
($)

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from 
the Loan Account

1 Community investment funds (other townships) 154,293,000
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

2 Implementation support 23,341,000 100% of total expenditure 
claimed

3
Facilitation and capacity 
building (other 
townships)

7,366,000 20.9% of total expenditure claimed

TOTAL 185,000,000



16

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with
the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that each
PIU and the township DRD offices involved in implementing the project are equipped with 
appropriately skilled staff, reasonable office space, equipment, and adequate financial 
resources required for implementation of the project throughout Project implementation.

Project Operations Manual

3. Not later than 6 months after the Effective Date, the Borrower, through the
Project Executing Agency, shall furnish to ADB the fully revised Project Operations Manual 
acceptable to ADB. The Borrower shall not amend, delete, suspend, or waive any part of the 
Project Operations Manual without the prior written approval of ADB.

Design and Construction Quality Management

4. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
Works under the Project are designed and constructed in accordance with all relevant national 
and local design codes and standards of the Borrower and that the construction supervision, 
quality control, contract management, and completion inspection and acceptance procedures 
will be in accordance with all applicable national laws and municipal and local regulations of 
the Borrower and the PAM.

Selection of Project Locations

5. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
selection of target Project locations is based on the following criteria, as set forth in detail in 
the PAM: (a) villages are poor and vulnerable to climate and disasters, based on objective 
information and data; and (b) villages have no ongoing or planned community development 
program or project. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the 
target Project locations will not be selected without ADB’s approval.

Subproject Selection and Eligibility Criteria

6. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that each
subproject meets the selection and eligibility criteria as set forth in detail in the PAM, including:

(a) not involve any activity included in the list of prohibited investment 
activities attached hereto as Schedule 5 and the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS, to the extent 



17
Schedule 4

not duplicative or included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
list attached hereto as Schedule 5;

(b) not involve any subproject categorized as Category A for Environment, 
Resettlement or Indigenous Peoples under the SPS;

(c) not involve any subproject categorized as EIA Type Project or IEE Type 
Project under the Government of Myanmar Environmental Impact 
Assessment Procedure (2015); and

(d) is a community development subproject that is technically, financially 
and environmentally viable, and socially and economically justified.

Block Grants Transfers for Subprojects

7. Prior to the release of a block grant from DRD to a VTDSC account, the
Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the following conditions are 
met:

(a) all village development support committees (VDSCs) in the village tract 
and the VTDSC have been established and staffed as required;

(b) the VTDSCs’ finance sub-committee has been set up and trained;

(c) the VTDSC has opened a bank account at a local bank (condition
applicable for the first disbursement only); and

(d) the VTDSC has signed a block grant agreement for the current cycle 
with the township DRD office.

8. The VTDSC shall submit a request for disbursement to the DRD union office
through the DRD township office, which the DRD township office signs, confirming all 
conditions above have been fulfilled.

Counterpart Support

9. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds necessary for the Project is
provided on a timely basis. The Borrower shall ensure that additional counterpart funds are 
available to cover any funding shortfalls that may occur. In addition to the foregoing, the 
Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its 
liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and Services contract.

Operation and Maintenance (“O&M”) of Subprojects

10. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that each
Subproject involving infrastructure has an O&M plan in place and takes into account the O&M 
costs. The processes for planning and implementing O&M activities shall include: 
(a) calculation of estimated costs and the allocation of responsibilities between the village and 
the DRD; (b) annual plan for the collection user/beneficiary contributions for O&M; (c) O&M 



18
Schedule 4

monthly schedule; (d) six-month O&M status report indicating the status of the work items in 
the last 6 months; and (e) routine inspections and maintenance.

Procurement

11. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations; and

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

12. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until:

(a) the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation has 
granted the final approval of the EARF; and

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from any ECOP 
and EMP into the Works contract.

13. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves voluntary land donation, until the Borrower has met the requirements described in the 
CPF.

14. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves impacts on ethnic groups, until the Borrower has met the requirements in the EGDF.

Environment

15. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 



19
Schedule 4

Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the EARF, EMP or ECOP, as applicable, and 
any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

16. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under
the SPS or categorized as lEE or EIA Type Project under the Borrower’s Environmental Impact 
Assessment Procedure (2015) is financed under the Project.

17. The Borrower shall ensure that each Subproject requiring an EMP under
section 24 of the Borrower’s Environmental Impact Assessment Procedure (2015) secures any 
required environmental approval by the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental 
Conservation.

Land Acquisition

18. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject which has any involuntary
resettlement impacts, within the meaning of the SPS, shall be financed under the Project.

19. In the case of voluntary land donation for a Subproject, the Borrower, through
the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that: (a) eminent domain or other powers of the 
Borrower is not involved in the acquisition, (b) such voluntary land donation(s) are implemented 
in accordance with the CPF, (c) there was informed consent and power of choice of affected 
persons through a prior and informed consultation(s) with them, and (d) such voluntary 
donation(s) do not severely affect the living standards of the affected persons but benefit them 
directly.

20. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all land
and all rights-of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor or 
villagers in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract.

21. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A or
Category B under the SPS is financed under theProject.

Indigenous Peoples

22. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of each Subproject and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
indigenous peoples; (b) the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EGDF and any subproject EGDP, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall ensure 
that no Subproject categorized as Category A or Category B resulting in negative impacts 
on ethnic groups as defined under the SPS is financed under the Project For the 
avoidance of doubt, a Subproject resulting in Category B due to positive impacts on ethnic 
groups as defined under the SPS shall be permitted to be financed under the Project.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

23. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human resources
to fully implement the EARF, EMP, ECOP, CPF, EGDF and EGDP, as applicable.



20
Schedule 4

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

24. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors or 
villagers to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor or villager set forth 
in the EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the CPF and the EGDF and 
any subproject EGDP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected 
people during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the 
CPF and the EGDF and any subproject EGDP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

25. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the CPF 
and the EGDF and any subproject EGDF, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the 
CPF and the EMGF and any subproject EMGP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.



21
Schedule 4

Grievance Redress Mechanism

26. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that
(a) safeguard grievance redress mechanisms acceptable to ADB are established in 
accordance with provisions in the EARF, CPF, and EGDF, at PMU, within the timeframes 
specified in the relevant EARF, CPF, and EGDF, to consider safeguards related complaints; 
and (b) a grievance redress mechanism, acceptable to ADB and in accordance with the PAM, 
is established and functioning effectively to (i) review and document eligible complaints,of 
project stakeholders; (ii) proactively address grievances; (iii) provide the complainants with 
notice of the chosen mechanism/action; and (d) prepare periodic reports to summarize the 
number of complaints received and resolved, chosen actions, and final outcomes of the 
grievances and make these reports available to ADB. Eligible complaints will include (a) those 
related to the project, (b) any of the service providers, (c) any person responsible for carrying 
out the project, (d) complaints on misuse of funds and other irregularities, and (e) grievances 
due to any safeguards and gender issues.

Prohibited List of Investments

27. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities attached hereto and the list 
of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS, to the extent not 
duplicative or included in the list of prohibited investment activities list attached hereto.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

28. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the core
labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during 
Project implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and 
incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do 
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

29. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 28 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

30. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a) the
GESIAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts 
include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the 
GESIAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GESIAP; and 
(d) progress on implementation of the GESIAP, including progress toward achieving key 
gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB.



22
Schedule 4

Public Awareness

31. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall undertake public
awareness campaigns through information disclosure, education and consultation on the 
Project and its benefits, including but not limited to information related to the CPF, EGDF, 
EARF, and GESIAP.

Good Governance and Anti corruption

32. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, and the Project Implementing
Agency shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and 
acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any 
alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the Project; and 
(b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory 
completion of such investigation.

33. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency and the Project Implementing
Agency shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all 
bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and 
examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. 
Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment lists are ineligible to participate in ADB- 
financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the Project. If the Project 
Executing Agency, Project Implementing Agency or ADB is or becomes aware or has a 
reasonable suspicion that any member of any Project Implementing Agency, PMU or PIU has 
engaged in corrupt or fraudulent practices (as defined in ADB’s Anti corruption Policy under or 
in connection with the Project or the Loan, the Project Implementing Agency will take such 
timely and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to investigate and/or remedy the situation.

34. In addition to these requirements, to deter corruption and increase
transparency, the Project Executing Agency shall create a Project webpage within 2 months 
of the Effective Date, accessible by the general public, to disclose various information 
concerning the Project including general information about the Project, public procurement 
related to the Project, Project progress and contact details in English and Myanmar. The 
website shall also provide a link to ADB’s Integrity Unit 
(http://www.adb.org/lntegrity/complaint.asp) for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations 
of corrupt practices arising out of the Project and Project activities. For each contract, the 
website shall include information on, among others, the list of participating bidders, name of 
the winning bidder, basic details on bidding procedures adopted, amount of contract awarded, 
and the list of goods/services, including consulting services, procured. The Project Executing 
Agency shall ensure that the Project Implementing Agency permits any bidder to request an 
explanation as to why a bid was unsuccessful and the Project Executing Agency shall respond 
within 20 working days. The webpage will be updated within three weeks after (a) each award 
of contract, and (b) each submission of the semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Report to ADB. 
In addition to the web-based disclosure, stakeholders, which include civil society and non­
governmental organizations, shall be provided by the Borrower with detailed information on 
procurement on public notice boards in their respective areas.



23

SCHEDULE 5

Prohibited investment Activities List

1. Production or activities involving harmful Or exploitative forms of forced labor or
child labor;

2. Production of or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under the laws
of Myanmar or regulations or international conventions and agreements or subject to 
international phaseouts or bans, such as (a) pharmaceuticals, pesticides, and herbicides, 
(b) ozone-depleting substances, (c) polychlorinated biphenyls and other hazardous chemicals, 
(d) wildlife or wildlife products regulated under the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, and (e) transboundary trade in waste or waste 
products;

3. Production of or trade in weapons and munitions, including paramilitary
materials;

4. Production of or trade in alcoholic beverages, excluding beer and wine;

5. Production of or trade in tobacco;

6. Gambling, casinos, and equivalent enterprises;

7. Production of or trade in radioactive materials, including nuclear reactors and
components thereof;

8. Production of, trade in, or use of unbonded asbestos fibers;

9. Commercial logging operations or the purchase of logging equipment for use in
primary tropical moist forests or old-growth forests;

10. Marine and coastal fishing practices, such as large-scale pelagic drift net fishing
and fine mesh net fishing, harmful to vulnerable and protected species in large numbers and 
damaging to marine biodiversity and habitats;

11. Road construction into protected areas;

12. Political and religious activities;

13. Development of new or expansion of existing settlements in critical habitats;

14. Activities that will require any compulsory acquisition of land or involuntary
resettlement; and

15. Activities that will have a negative impact on ethnic groups.




































































52256-001: Naryn Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Development Program


LOAN NUMBER 3854-KGZ(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Naryn Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Development Program)

between

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED .2^ .2^$

KGZ 52256



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated $&£#?&&& Z0& between KYRGYZ 

REPUBLIC ("Borrowed) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB”),

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
prog ram described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement (the ‘’Program");

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (:,ADF Grant 
Agreement'), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB's Special Funds 
resources in an amount of thirteen million seven hundred thousand Dollars ($13700,000) 
(J'ADF Grant”) for the purpose of the Program;

(C) the Program will be carried out by DDWSSD (as defined hereinafter} as 
executing agency and ARIS (as defined hereinafter) as implementing agency; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Program Agreement of even date herewith between ADB and ARIS;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE [

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Sec tion 1.01. All the provisions of ADB?s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (v) is delated and the following is substituted therefor:

"Program" means the program for which ADB has agreed to 
make the Loan, as described in the Loan Agreement and as such 
description may be amended from time to time by agreement 
between ADB and the Borrower;

(b) The term "Project?1 wherever It appears in the Loan Regulations shall be 
substituted by the term ‘'Program".

(c) Section 2.01 (x) Is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:



2

''Program Executing Agency" means the entity responsible for 
the carrying out of the Program as specified in the Loan 
Agree m ent;

(d) The term "Project Executing Agency" wherever it appears in the Loan 
Regulations shall be' substituted by the term ^Program Executing 
Agency".

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “ADB's Results-Based Lending Policy” means ADB's policy set out in 
the R-Paper on Piloting Results-Based Lending for Programs approved 
by ADB on 6 March 2013;

(b) "Antlcorruption Guidelines" means ADB's Guidelines to Prevent or 
Mitigate Fraud, Corruption and Other Prohibited Activities in Results- 
Based Lending for Programs as set forth in Appendix 7 to ADB's 
Results-Based Lending Policy;

(o) "ARIS" means the Community Development and investment Agency of 
the Kyrgyz Republic established for the purpose of implementing the 
Borrower's Investment programs;

(d) "DDWSSDH means the Department of Drnking Water Supply and 
Sewerage Development under the State Agency for Water Resources;

(e) "Deposit Account" means the account referred to in paragraph 2 of 
Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement;

(f) “DLI" means each disbursement-linked indicator as set forth in the OLI 
Matrix;

{g) “DLI Matrix" means the DLI matrix for the Program as set forth in 
Attachment 2 of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as updated from 
time to time by the Borrower and ADB:

(h) £!DLI Verification Protocol” means the protocol for verifying the 
Borrowers achievement of each DLI, as set forth in the PID:

(i) "Eligible Expenditures" means the eligible expenditures referred to in 
paragraph 2 of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement;

(j) "Environmental Safeguards” means the objectives and policy principles 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1. and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the BPS;

(k) "FY” means the fiscal year of the Borrower, which runs from 1 January 
to 31 December of each year;



3

(I) "High-Value Contracts" means (i) procurement of works, turnkey and 
supply and installation contracts that cost S5 million equivalent or more 
per contract; (ii) procurement of goods contracts that cost $5 million 
equivalent or mors per contract; (iii) information technology or non­
consulting services contracts that cost $5 million equivalent or more per 
contract; and (iv) consulting services contracts that cost $5 million 
equivalent or more per contract;

(m) "Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the objectives and policy 
principles set forth in Chapter V. Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the objectives and policy 
principles set forth In Chapter V, Appendix 2. and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(o) "Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) "Naryn" means Naryn province {oblast);

(q) TAP" means the program action plan for the Program dated 
13 September 2019, as updated from time to time by the Borrower and 
ADB;

(r) "PID’1 means the program impiementation document for the Program 
dated 13 September 2019, as updated from time to time by the Borrower 
and ADB;

(s) "Procurement Manual" means the procurement manual developed by 
ARIS which sets out the procurement processes forth© Program in line 
with international best practices and acceptable to ADB;

(t) "Program Actions" means the actions set out in the PAP:

(u) "Program Agreement7' means the program agreement of even date
herewith among ADB, Program Executing Agency and Program 
implementing Agency, as such agreement may be amended from time 
to time;

(v) ^Program Completion Date" means the date set out in paragraph 4 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement or such other date as the Borrower 
and ADB may agree;

(w) "Program Executing Agency” means the DDWSSD or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible \>r the overall 
monitoring of the results of the Program;

(x) ‘'Program implementing Agency" means ARIS or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB. which is responsible for the implementation of the 
Program;



4

(y) "SDWSSSS” means the Borrower's Strategy for Development of Water 
Supply and Sewerage Systems in Settlements of the Kyrgyz Republic 
until 2026, which is supported by the Program;

(z) "SPS" means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(aa) "Table" means the table on the allocation and withdrawal of Loan 
proceeds set forth in Attachment 1 of Schedule 3 to this Loan 
Agreement; and

(bb) "WSU:? means a water supplies and utilities services entity established 
and operating in accordance with laws of Kyrgyz Republic, collectively 
“WSUs”.

ARTICLE 11

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of thirteen million seven hundred thousand Dollars 
($13,700,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term "grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
'ate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03, The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of ths principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shah' be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall apply the proceeds of the Loan to the 
financing of expenditures on the Program in accordance with the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3. 02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2028 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Program, the Borrower shall 
perform, or cause to be performed, alf obligations set forth in Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement, the Grant Agreement and the Program Agreement

Section 4. 02. As part of the reports and information referred to in 
Section 6.05 of the Loan Regulations, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be furnished, to 
ADB (a) quarterly reports on the implementation of the Program, including the accomplishment 
of the DLls, the carrying out of the Program Actions and the Eligible Expenditures; and (b) as 
ADB shall reasonably request, additional Information in connection with the reports described 
in subsection (a) hereinabove and other information on Program implementation.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Program and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation; 
and



6

(b) the Program Implementing Agency shah have failed to perform any of 
its obligations under the Program Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of the 
events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement shall have been duly authorized by, ar.d 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower, and ad conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled: and

(b) the Program Agreement shall have been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered and all conditions precedent to rts effectiveness 
(other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan 
Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Sec tion 6.02. The following are specified as additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included h the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and rs legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) the Program Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Program Executing Agency and Program 
Implementing Agency, and is legally binding upon the Program 
Executing Agency and Program Implementing Agency in accordance 
with its terms.

Section 6,03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement forth© purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. Ths Minister of Finance of We Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses ar© specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the.Borrower

Ministry of Finance
58 Erkindik Boulevard
Bishkek 720040
Kyrgyz Republic

Facsimile Number:

(996) 312 661 645

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2484.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Authorized Representative



SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Program

1 . The objective of the Program is to support SDWSSSS's Implementation through
inclusive and reliable access to safe water supply and improved sanitation for rural 
communities in Naryn ob/asf

2 Part 1; Expanding water supply and sanitation infrastructure and piloting
of sanitation solutions comprising the following:

(a) safe water sources, water storage, and treatment and disinfection 
systems;

(b) distribution networks for the target population of approximately 64,000;

(c) gender-sensitive safe water and sanitation facilities In selected village 
kindergartens; schools and health facilities; and

(d) piloting non-networked household sanitation solutions.

3. Part 2: Strengthening institutional capacities for enhanced sustainability
in the rural water supply and sanitation sector comprising the following:

(a) establishing and strengthening WSUs with at least 20% female 
participation across all WSUs by 2025 and 40% female participation in 
WSU-related trainings and public consultations:

(b) delivering financial management training to further enhance ‘nternal 
control processes and procedures for Program Implementing Agency 
and WSUs;

(c) adopting and applying a procurement manual and a multi-year 
procurement action plan: and

(d) developing and implementing a monitoring and evaluation framework to 
improve knowledge of the asset inventory and data management.

4. The Program is expected to be completed by 31 December 2027.





12

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

f. Except as set out in this Schedule or as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan
proceeds shall be disbursed rn accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Deposit Account

2. Prior to submitting the first application to ADB for withdrawal from the Loan
Account, the Borrower shall nominate an account established at a commercial bank, as the 
Deposit Account for the Program into which all withdrawals from the Loan Account shall be 
deposited.

3. The Borrower shall maintain separate records in respect of the Deposit Account
in accordance with accounting principles acceptable to ADB.

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

4. (a) The Table sets out the Loan amounts allocated for withdrawal in respect
of a DLI upon the Borrowers achievement of the corresponding DLI targets as set out in the 
DLI Matrix. The years set out In the Table are Indicative. They do not restrict withdrawal on 
account of any DLI targets achieved whether ahead of, or later than, the indicated year, 
provided that such DLI targets are achieved on or before the Program Completion Date.

(b) ADB may, by notice to the Borrower, reallocate the Loan amounts set 
out in the Table within the same DLI or from one DLI to any other DLI.

5. Prior to submitting any application for withdrawal from the Loan Account in
respect of a DLI, the Borrower shall submit to ADB in accordance with the DLI Verification 
Protocol satisfactory evidence showing that: (a) such DLI has been fully achieved; or (b) for a 
DLI for which partial disbursement is allowed (as specified in the DLI Matrix), such DLI has 
been achieved to the extent required for partial disbursement under the DLI Verification 
Protocol. Upon ADBJs confirmation that the DLI has been achieved in full or in part, the 
Borrower may submit to ADB an application for withdrawal of the corresponding Loan amount 
for such DLI.

Advance Financing and Financing for Prior Results

6. (a) Prior to the achievement of the DLls. the Borrower may withdraw from
the Loan Account an advance financing amount for the purposes of meeting the Program’s 
financing requirements and supporting the achievement of such DLls, provided that the 
outstanding advance financing amount shall not, at any time, exceed 25% of the Loan amount. 
ADB shall deduct the outstanding advance financing amount, or anyportlon thereof, from the 
Loan proceeds to be disbursed upon achievement of the DLls,



13
Schedule 3

(b) The Borrower may withdraw from the Loan Account for DLls achieved 
prior to the Effective Date but not earlier than 12 months before the date of this Loan 
Agreement, provided that the aggregate of such withdrawals for prior results shall not exceed 
20% of the Loan amount

(c) The aggregate of the outstanding advance financing amount and the 
amount withdrawn for financing for prior results under subparagraphs (a) and (b) hereinabove 
shall not. at any time, exceed 30% of the Loan amount

Reconciliation

7. If any DLl has not been achieved by the Program Completion Date, the
Borrower shall, within 6 months of the Program Completion Date, provide a refund to ADB for 
any outstanding advance financing amount or part thereof for such DLl.

8. If the total Eligible Expenditures amount to less than the Loan amount
withdrawn by the Borrower, the Borrower shall provide a refund to ADB for an amount equal 
to the extent of the shortfall within 6 months of the Program Completion Date.



14
Attachment 1 to Schedule 3

TABLE

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
{$)

Disbu^eme 
nt- Linked 
Indicators

____ 1P_U)

Total ADB 
Financing 
Allocation

Financing 
for Prior 
Results

•

FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 FY2023 FY2024 FY2D25 FY2026

DL] 1 4,110,000.00 1,438,500.00 890,500.00 890,500.00 890,500.00

DU 2 1,370,000.00 548,000.00 274,000.00 548,000.00

DLi 3 274,000.00 39,144.00 39.143.00 39,143.00 39,143.00 78,284.00 39,143.00

Dl.t 4 4,521,000.00 ■ 904,200.00 904,200.00 904,200.00 904,200.00 904,200.00

DUS 685,000.00 171.250.00 171,250.00 171,250.00 171,250.00

DUG 685,000.00 411,000.00 39,142.86 39,142.88 39,142.86 39,142.86 39,142.86 39,142.86 39.142.86

□ Li 7 685,000.00 171,250.00 171,250.00 171,250,00 171,250.00

DUB 1,370,000.00 195,714.29 195,714.29 195,714,29 195,714.29 195,714.29 195,714.29 195,714.24

TOTAL 13.700,000.00 411,000.00 1,520,701.14 3,335,950.14 2.685,200.14 2,787,950.14 2,279,091.14 274,000.14 406,107.14



15
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

DLI MATRIX

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline 
Value and 

Year

Prior 
Results 2020

2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

DL11; By 2026, at
: least 64,000 people 

in the villages of 
Naryn oblast use 
potable water

0 population 
use water 
from 
disinfected 
sources, 
2019

Potable water 
supoly & 
distribution 
network for 
4,500 
population 
commissioned

Potable water 
supply & 
distribution 
network, for 
19,000 
population 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

Potable water 
supply & 
distribution 
network far 
45,000 
population 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

Potable water 
supply & 
distribution 
network for 
64,000 
population 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

DLI 2: By 2026, at 
least an additional 
13 village schools/ 
kindergartens and 
8 health facilities 
are served by 
improved gender- 
sensitive water and 
sanitation facilities

0 additional 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
and hearth 
facilities, 
2019

(ij GSWS 
facilities in 3 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
commissioned 
(ii) GSW8 
facilities in 3 
health 
facil'ties 
commissioned

(i) GSWS 
facilities in 7 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
(cumulative) 
commissioned 
(ii) GSWS 
facilities in 5 
hearth 
facilities 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

(i) GSWS 
facilities fa 13 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
(cumulative) 
commissioned 
(ii) GSWS 
facilities in 8 
health 
facilities 
(oumulsiive) 
commissioned

□LI 3: By 2025, 
detailed design of 
infrastructure is 
completed for 43 
villages

0 completed P redesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
13 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
23 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
28 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
33 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
38 villages

Predesign 
activities 
and detailed 
design 
completed fa 
43 villages

□E I 4: By 2024, 
infrastructure

Infrastructure 
inadequate

Preparation of 
bidding

(QSafe water 
source,

(i) Safe water 
source,

(i) Safe water 
source,

(I) Safe water 
source, J



16
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline 
Value and 

Year

Prior 
Results

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
I

2025 2026

components for 
water supply and 
distribution 
networks are in 
place for at least 
64,000 population

or non­
existent

documents to 
conduct 
tender for 
construction 
works to cover 
at least 4,500 
population

disinfection, 
and storage 
system 
completed to 
cover needs 
Of 4 500 
population

(ii) WEjter 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 4,500 
population

I disinfection, 
and storage 
system 
completed to 
cover needs 
of 19,000 
population
(ii) Water 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 19.000 
population

disinfection, 
and storage

I system
I completed to 

cover needs 
of 45,000 
population
(ji) Water 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 45,000 
population

I disinfection, 
and storage 
system 
completed to 
cover needs 
of 64,000 
population

(ii) Water 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 64,000 
population

DU 5: By 2023, 
non-networked, 
household 
sanitation solutions 
have been piloted 
in at least 2 villages 
with minimum 
combined total of 
660 households

Sanitation 
solutions not 
piloted

Feasibility 
study 
completed for 
pilot approach

List of target 
villages and 
households 
identified.

Detailed 
designs 
developed

Solutions 
implemented 
for at least 
250 
households

Solutions 
implemented 
for at least 
660 
households 
(cumulative)

□ t.l 6: Procurement 
manual developed 
and implemented 
for the RBL 
program from 2020

Gaps 
identified in 
ARIS1 
procurement 
and contract 
management 
systems

Procurement 
manual and
MYP 
developed

2020 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2021 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2022 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2023 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2024 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2025 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2026 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

DLI 7: By 2026, 
100% of internal 
audit staff and

Gaps 
identified in 
ARIS’s

ARIS ensures 
that at least 
four internal

ARIS ensures 
that at least 
four internal

ARIS ensures i 
that at least I 
four internal |

J
ARIS 
ensures that 
st icast four



17

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline
Value and

Year

Prior 
Results 202D 2021

finance staff of 
ARIS are trained in 
internal audit and 
financial
management, 
respectively, by a 
nationally 
recognized institute

financial 
management 
system. The 
audit and 
financial 
management 
units have 3 
and 13 staff, 
respectively, 
without 
accreditation.

audit staff 
(female/msle) 
and finance 
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively in 
audit and 
financial 
management

DLl 3: By 2026. 
WSUs fully 
operational and 
financially 
sustainable, with at 
least 20% female 
participation within 
WSUs, and at least 
40% female 
participation in 
WSU-related 
trainings and public 
consultations

No 
functioning 
structures for 
operations, 
maintenance, 
and 
management 
support

Scoping study 
conducted for 
jurisdiction, 
roles and 
responsibilities 
of raion and 
aiyl okmotu 
levels

(i) Public 
consultations 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% female 
participation, 
to cover 4,500 
population 
(ii) Tariff 
developed by 
aiyl okmotu 
tor 4,500 
population
(lit) “anff 
approved by 
aiyl kenesh 
for 4,500 
population



Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

audit staff 
(female/inafe) 
and finance 
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively in 
audit and 
financial 
management

audit staff 
(female/male) 
and finance 
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively in 
audit and 
financial 
management

I internal audit 
staff

: (female/male) 
' and finance
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively 
in audit and 
financial 
management

(i) WSUs 
established to 
serve 
population 
receiving 
water supply 
in 2021 
(ir) Public 
consultations 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% female 
participation, 
to cover 
19,000 
population
(Hi) Tariff set 
by aiyl okmotu 
for 19,000 
population.
(iv) Tariff 
approved by

(i) WSUs 
established to 
serve 
population 
receiving 
water supply 
in 2022
(ir) Public 
ccnsLitt^inns 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% female 
participation, 
to cover 
45,000 
population 
(ill) Tariff set 
by aiyl okmotu 
tor 45,000 
population
(iv) Tariff 

_app roved by

(i) WSUs 
established to 
serve 
population 
receiving 
water supply 
in 2023 (ii) 
Public 
consultations 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% femaie 
participation, 
to cover 
64,000 
population 
(iti) Tariff set 
by aiyl okmotu 
tor 54,000 
population
(iv) Tariff 
approved by _J

(i) 64,000 
population 
served by 
WSUs, with 
(ii) at least 
20% female 
participation 
in the overall 
WSUs

(i) 64,000 
population 
served by 
WSUs, with 
(li) at least 
20% female 
participation 
in the overall 
WSUs

s

f



18
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline
Value and 

Year

Prior 
Results

2020 2021 f 2022
I

2023 2024 2025 2026

j aiy! kenesh 
i for 19,000 

population

aiyl kenesh 
for 45,000 
population

aiyl kenesh 
for 64,000 
population

ADB = Asian Development Bank, ARIS = Community Development and Investment Agency, BPM: Beneficiary Feedback Mechanism, DLl = 
disbursement-linked indicator, WSU = water supplies and utilities services entity established and operating in accordance with laws of Kyrgyz Republic, 
MYP = Multi-Year Procurement Plan of Action.
Source; Asian Development Bank and Community Development and Investment Agency.



19

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Program

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the Program Executing Agency and
the Program implementing Agency to ensure, that the Program is implemented in accordance 
with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PID. Any subsequent change to the PID shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADE. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PID and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Program Executing Agency and the Program
Implementing Agency, ensure that the amount of Eligible Expenditures under the Program for 
any FY is equal to or exceeds the Loan proceeds withdrawn by the Borrower in the same FY. 
Such Eligible Expenditures are part of the expenditures Incurred under SDWSSSS, but they 
exclude any expenditures for (a) procurement of works, goods and services from countries 
which are not members of ADB; (b) procurement of works, goods and services from persons 
or entities debarred or suspended by ADB; (c) procurement involving High-Value Contracts; 
(d) any activities which are classified as category A for environmental impact under the SPS; 
and (e) any activities which are prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
EPS.

Independent Verification Agent

3. Within 240 days of the Effective Date, the Borrower, through DDWSSD, shall
have entered into an agreement with an independent verification agent, acceptable to ADB.

DLl Compliance and Program Dialogue

4. The Borrower shall ensure that all DLls achieved under the Program continue
to be complied with for the duration of SDWSSSS.

5. The Borrower shall keep ADB informed of relevant discussions with other
multilateral or bilateral aid agencies that may have implications for the implementation of 
SDWSSSS and shall provide ADB with an opportunity to comment on any resulting proposals. 
The Borrower shall give due consideration to ADB!s views before finalizing and implementing 
any such proposal.

Program Technical Aspects

6. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of technical requirements are implemented in a 
timely and efficient manner.



20
Schedule 4

Fiduciary

7. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of financial management and fiduciary are 
implemented in a timely and efficient manner.

Procurement

8. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of procurement are implemented in a timely and 
efficient manner.

Procurement Manual

9. The Borrower shall ensure that ARIS has the Procurement Manual in place for
institutional strengthening and improving procurement practices.

EhyLC°O.Tteritaj and Social Safeguards

10. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of environmental and social safeguards are 
implemented m a timely and efficient manner.

11. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that no construction or rehabilitation works under the Program involve significant 
adverse environmental impacts that may be classified as category A under the SPS. Prior to 
commencing any construction or rehabilitation works under the Program, the Borrower shall 
conduct, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to conduct, a screening to ensure that 
any works that may be classified as category A for environment impacts within the meaning of 
SPS are excluded from the Program.

12. Additionally, the Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing
Agency to ensure, that before any activities are approved for financing under the Program, the 
following conditions are met relating to limiting asbestos use under the prohibited investment 
activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS: (a) an assessment is conducted on the existing 
structures that need to be demolished or removed to evaluate the risk of asbestos presence; 
and (b) a screening of procurement procedures be conducted to ensure that asbestos- 
containing materials are not used or financed under the Program (except for the purchase and 
use of bonded asbestos cement sheeting where the asbestos content is less than 20% as 
provided under the prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS).

13. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and 
decommissioning of all activities under the Program comply with: (a) all applicable laws, 
regulations and guidelines of the Borrower relating to environment, health and safety: (b) the 
Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements, including monitoring 
requirements set forth in the Program Action Plan.

14. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and 



21
Schedule 4

decommissioning of all activities under the Program comply with; (a) all applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower relating to resettlement; (b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; 
and (c) all measures and requirements, including monitoring requirements set forth in the 
Program Action Plan.

15. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that the Program does not involve any indigenous people risks or impacts within the 
meaning of ths SPS. If due to unforeseen circumstances, the Program Involves any such 
rmpacts, the Borrower shall ensure that the Program complies with (a) all applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower refating to indigenous peoples; (b) Indigenous Peoples 
Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements, including monitoring requirements set 
forth in the Program Action Plan.

Gender

16. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of gender equality are implemented in a timely and 
efficient manner.

Financial Support for WSUs

17. The Borrower shall, through the local governments, allocate, separate from any
tariff increases, through budgetary allocations or other means, counterpart funas on a timely 
basis to ensure that the WSUs have sufficient financial support for their operation and 
maintenance.

C cod Govern a nee and. Anti corru pt io n

18. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the Program Executing Agency and
the Program Implementing Agency to ensure, that the Program complies with the 
Anti corruption Guidelines and that all appropriate and timely measures are taken to prevent, 
detect and respond to allegations of fraud, corruption or any other prohibited activities relating 
to the Program in accordance with the Anticorruption Guidelines.

19. The Borrower shall, or cause the Program Executing Agency and the Program
Implementing Agency to, (a) promptly inform ADB of any allegations of fraud, corruption or any 
other prohibited activities relating to the Program; and (b) cooperate fully with any investigation 
by ADB on such allegations and extend all necessary assistance, including providing access 
to all relevant records, for satisfactory completion of such investigation,

20. With 90 days of the Effective Date, the Borrower shall, or cause the Program
Implementing Agency to update its public website to (a) provide information on the progress 
of the Program; (b) post the audited annual financial statements *or the Program, as such 
financial statements become available; and (c) disseminate other relevant information on 
Program implementation.






















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3847-NEP(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Ope^at on? [Concessional]) 

(Food Safety and Agnculture Cornmerc alization Program) 

between

NEPAL 

and 

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 10 DECEMBER 20'9

NEP 48218



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT daled 10 Decerrber 2019 between NEPAL ("Borrower') 
and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) ADB has received from the Borrower a development policy letter sales 
12 September 2C19 ('Policy Lottof), sod ng forth certain objectives, policies and actions 
described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement, dosigrod to develop the Borovzer's 
agriculture sector ("Program”);

(B) tne Borrower has applied to ADB tor a loan for the purposes o' the 
Program; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
AJB's ordinary capital resources upon tie terms and cond tions sot forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB's Ordinary Ope'aticrs 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (Loan Regulations*), are hereby 
mace applicable to this I can Agreement with Ihe same force and effect as if they were July 
set forth hemin, submet however, to the following mod fixations:

(a) Sec: on 2.01(v) s de etec and the following is substituted therefor:

“Program" means Ihe program for w-lch ADB has agreed to 
Ta<e the Loan, as described in the Loan Agreement and as the 
description thereof may be amended from time to tme by 
agreement between ADB and the Borrower;

(b) Tho term ‘Project" wherever it appears in the Loan Regulations shall bo 
substituted by the term^P-ogram’.

(c) Sect on 2.01(x) s de eted and the following is substituted tharefcr

■Program Executing Agency* means the entity or entitles 
responsible for the carrying out of the Program as specified h 
the Loor. Agreement:



2

fd) The term ‘Project Executing Agency’ wherever it appears n the Lean 
Regulations Shall be substituted by the term "Program Executing 
Agency"; and

(e) Section 5.0"{b) is cclctcd.

Section 1.02. Wherever used n this Lean Agreement tno several 
terns defined in the Loan Regelations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified he en or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) 'Counterpart Funds" means the loca currency generated Irom the Loan 
proceeds under the Program and refe'red to in oaragraphs 8 o' 
Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement;

(b) “Deposit Account’ means tits account referred to in paragraph 3 o' 
Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement;

fci "First Tranche" means tne purton of the proceeds of the I can in an 
amount equivalent tc $25,000,000 to be withdrawn pursuant to and 
subject to the provisions of paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to ths Loan 
Agreement;

fd} ":GANDAKI MOLMAC"’ means the Ministry of Land Management. 
Agriculture and Cooporatves in the Gandaki Province of the Borrower, 
or any successor thereto

(e) HLC' means the High Level Committee, chaired by the Secretary of 
MOALD, which is established for the Program;

(I) “Loan Disbursement Handcoo\" means ADBs Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017. as amended Irom time to time):

(qj “MOALD" moans the Borrower's- Ministry cl Agriculture and Livestock 
Development, or any successor thereto acceptable to AOB:

(h) ‘MOF’ means the Borrower's Ministry of Finance, or ony successor 
thereto:

(i) 'MOLMAC' means the Ministry of Land Management, Agriculture and 
CoopA'atives in any prov nee of the Borrower, or any successor thereto;

(j) NPCS" means the Borrowor's National Planning Commission 
Secretariat, or any Successor thereto;

(k) "Policy Matrix" means the policy matrix as agreed between the Borrower
and ADB. which sets forth actions accomplished or to be accomplished 
by the Borrower under the Program and is attached to too Policy Letter.

(I) "Program Executing Agency' fo' the purposes of. and wrhin the 
meaning of. the Loan Regulations means MOF or any successor thereto 



3

acceptable to ADB. which is responsible for the caiyng OLt of the 
Program;

(m) "Province” means the Gandaki Province of tha Borcwer.

(n} "Second T'ancho" moans the balance of the p-oceeds of the Loan 
remaining in the Loan Account afie- the utilization o' the First Tranche 
to be withdrawn pursuant to and subject to the provisions of paragraph 
6 of Schedule 3 Io this Loan Agreement; and

(o} "Working Committee" means the working committco established under 
each of MOALD and GAhDAKI MOLMAC fcr tne Program as doscribad 
in paragraph 3 of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to end to the Borrower from ADC’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of fifty million Dollars (S5O.OOC.DOC).

(b> Tho Loan has a principal repayment period of '6 years, and a grace 
pcrod as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “g^ace period1 as usee in subsection (b) here nabove means 
the perod prior to the first Principal Payment Date in acco'dance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedue 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2 02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB ar interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Lean withdrawn from the Loan Account a^d outstanding from time to time

Section 2.03. The interest cha'go and any other charge on the Loan 
shall bo payable semiannually on 1 May and 1 November n each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Laan Account in accordance with tne amort nation schedule set fodh 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal of the Loan 
and tho currency of payment of the interest charge ter tho purposes of Sections 4.03(a) and 
4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall bo the Dollar.



4

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. I he Borrower shall cause the proceeds of tho Loan to be 
apolied to the financing of expenditures on the Program n accordance with the provisions of 
this Loan Agreement.

Section 3 02. The proceeds of the Loan snail be withdrawn in 
accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Ag-eement. as such Schedule may 
bo amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrows- and ADB.

Section 3.03. The Loan Closing Date for the otrposes of Section 8.02 
o' the Loan Regulations shall be 31 May 2021 or such other date as may from time to time be 
ag-eed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carry ng out of the Program, tho Borrower shal 
perform, or cause Io be performed all obligations set forth in Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 4. 02. (a) As part of the reports and information referred to
in Section 6.05 of the Loan Regulations, the Borrows' shal furnish, or cause to be furnished, 
to ADB all such raoorts and information as ADB shall reasonably request concerning: (I) the 
Ccuntarpart Funds and the use thereof; ano (ii) the implementation of he Program, including 
tho accoTpilshmo('t of tho targets and carrying out of the actions set cut in the Policy Letter.

(b) Without limiting the generality ot the foregoing or Section 6.05 o' the 
Lean Regua’ons. the Borrower snail furnish, or cause to be turnsned, to ADB quarterly 
reports on 'he carrying out of the P-ogram and on the accomplishment of the largels and 
earn/ ng out of the actons set out r the Pol cy Latter.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days alle- the date ol this Loan Agreement is 
specified kr the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Socoon 9.04 pt ne 
Lean Regulations.



5

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6.01. Tne Secretary ur Joint Secrets^ (International Economic 
Cooperation Coordination Div sion) o' the MOF is designatec as representative of lie Borrower 
for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Tfe follow ng addresses are specified far the purposes 
of Section 11.0' of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Singha Durbar
Kathmandu, Nepal

Facsimile Number

♦977 1 421-1 164

For APB

Asian Development Rank
6 ADB Avenue
Menoaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philipp nes

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2391



IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties ncrctc, acting through their
rcsrosontativos thcroirto duly authorised, have caused this _oan Agroorront to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
pr ncipal office of ADB.

Secretary 
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK



7

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Program

1. The ofnclpal objective of the Program is to improve food safely and commercial
competitiveness in the agriculture sector and the- scope induces (a) food safety arc quality 
monitoring systems improved; (bj agriculture commercialization promoted; and (c) Institutional 
capacity strengthened. Ine Program is described in more detail in the Policy Leiter.

2. The Program is expected Io be completed by 31 May 2021.




9

SCHEDULE 3

Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

1. Except as set out in this Schedule or as ADB nay otherw se ag'ee the Loan
proceeds shall be disbursed n acco'danco with the Loan Dsbursemenl Handbook

2. An appl cation for withdrawal from the Loan Acccunt shall be submitted lo ADB
oy the Borrower and shall bo in a form satisfactory to ADB.

3. (a) Pho' to submitting the first application to ADB for withdrawal from the
_oan Account, tho Borrower shall nominate ar account (the Deposit Account)al Nepal Rastra 
Bank into which all withdrawals from the Loan Account shall be deposited. rhe Deposit 
Account shall bo established, managed and liquidated in accordance with the applicable 
regulations anc pxcecuresof tie Borrower.

fb) Separate accounts end records n respect of the Deposit Account shall 
be maintained n eccorcance w th accounting principles accep-.3ble to ADB. Upon ACB s 
request, the Borrower shall have tho financial statements lor the Deposit Account audited by 
independent auditors, whoso qualifications experience and terms o' rcfcrcnco are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing cr the national equivalent 
acceptable to ADB. Promptly after their preparation but in any event not later than 6 months 
after tho date of ADB's tequest. copies of such audited financial statements anc the option of 
the auditors on the financial statements, in the Engl sr language, shall be turn shed to ADB

4. No Loan proceeds shall bo withdrawn to finance any item sDocrtod in
Allacmert 1 tc this Schedule.

5. The Borrower may wihdraw the First Tranche upon effectiveness of this Loan
Agreement

6. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Loan Agreement and except as
ADB may otherwise agree, nq withdrawals shall be inado from the Loan Account for tho 
Socono Tranche unless ADB Is sadsfiec. after consultation with the Borrower, that 
(a) sufficient progress has been achieves by Ihe Borrower n the carrying out of the Program. 
(b)tho policy actions that were met for me release of the F rat Tranche coni nue to be compl ed 
with by the Borower; and (c) Ihe Borrower has met the policy actions for tie release cf th*? 
tranche specified In Attachment 3 to this Schedule.



10
Attachment 1 to Schedule 3

Negative List

No withdrawals of Loan proceeds wil be made tor the following;

(i) expenditures for goods included in the following groups or sud-qroups of the 
United Nations Standard International Trade Classification. Rov sion 3 (SITC. 
Rev. 3) or any successor groups or suc-groups jrdor future revisions to the 
SITC. as cesignatod by ADR by notice to the Borrower:

Tabic: ineligible Items

Chapter Heading Description of Items
112 Alcoholic beverages
121 Tobacco, unmanufactured: tobacco refuse
122 Tobacco, manufactured {whether or not containing tobacco 

substitute
525 Radioactive and associated materials
567 Pearls, precious and semiprecious stones, unw-orkee cr 

worked
718 7187 Nuclear reacto's. ard parts thereof, fuel elements 

(cartridges), nonirraciated for nuclear readore
728 728.43 Tobacco processing machinery
857 897.3 Jewelry of goid silver or plalinurn-group metals (except 

watches and watch cases) and goldsmiths' or silversmiths' 
wares (including set gems}

_ 971 ____
Source: United Nations.

Cold nonmonotaty (axclucing gold ore and coneenlrales)

(ii) expenditures in the currency of the Borrower o' for goods supplied from the 
territory of the Borrower;

(ii) expenditures for goods supplied under a contract that any national or 
international financing institution or agency will have financed or has agreed 1n 
finance, including any contract financed under any loan o' gran: from too ADB;

(ivy expenditures for goods intended fc a military or param litary purpose or (or 
luxury consumption;

(v) expenditures for narcotics;

(vl) expenditures for cnvkonmentally hazardous goods, the manufacture, use or 
import of which is prohibited unoer the laws of the Borrower or internatnrai 
agreements to which the Borrower is a party; and

(vi) expenditures on account of any payment prohibited by the Borrower in 
compliance with a dec sior of the United Nations Security Council takeh under 
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.



11
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

Policy Actions for Release of the First Tranche

1. Cab net shall have endorsed Ihe draft Pestic de Management Bill 2075 (2018)
far submission to the Part ament, tc regulate production, sales, storage transpo'talicn and to 
discourage Ihe overuse of harmful chemicals.

2. MOALD shall nave suomittod a notification on the World Trade Organization
Notification Submission System for the Max mum Residue I mil (MRl i of pesticides in at bast 
10 fruits, vegetables and food items, far comments and suggestions by tracing partner 
countries.

3. Cab not shall have approved the National Food Safety Policy 2C76 (2019)
incorporating a aomp'onensive framework far food safety and quality. developing national food 
industry, and promote food exports.

4. MOALD shall have prepared a drart Food Safety and Quality Bill ar d suomitted
fa ‘tie Ministry ol Law, Justice, and Parliamentary Affairs for review, Including provisions to 
align the certification system with International fooc safety standards.

5. MOALD snail have approved a roadmap lor international accred tat on of (a) the
Cental Arirral and Poultry Disease Investigation Laboratory, (b) National Avian Disease 
Investigator Laboratory, and (c) Veterinan/ Standards and Drug Administration Labo'atory

6. MOAl D shall have submitted a draft of the Agribusiness Promoter BII2075 to
the Cabinet to encoirage contract farming and agrieulturc marketing, with prcvsio?s on the 
participation and benefits of marginalizes and women farmers.

7. Cab net shall have enco'sod a draft amondmont to the Seed Act 2045 (1988)
for suemsson to Parliament, to ensure farmer protection and Io encourage private sector 
participation in seed business.

8. Cab not shall have endorsed the draft amendment to Plant Protection Act 2064
(2007) far submission to too Part ament to regulate protect reps ago nst nvasi’/o species 
and posts.

9. MOALD shall have conducted Agnculture Development Strategy (AOS)
orientation workshops in all provinces. to align sub nationa love agriculture strategies and 
p ans to the rational ADS.



12
Attachment 3 to Scnedule3

Policy Actions for Release of the Second Tranche

1. MOALD shall have endorsed □ d<aft Pesticide Manaqomont Regulation and
subm tied to the Ministry of Law. Justice and Pari amentary Abairs for consent.

2. MOALD shall have: (a) issued and published in Ine ofTiaal gazette the Max mum
Residuo Limit (MRL) of postiados in at least 10 rnjiis, vegetables and food items: and (b) 
submitted a notification on the World Trade Organization Ncti'ication Submisscr System for 
tho MRL of postic dos for at least 1C add tional fruits, vegetables and fooc items, for comments 
a^d suggestions by trading partner countries.

3. MOALD shall have: (a) developed pesticide residue test protocol and
surveillance plan for selected 2 vegetables: ard (b) conducted a pilot study of pesticide residue 
les! in the selected 2 vegetables.

4. MOALD shall have: (a) prepared a plan for upgrading existing food safety
laboratories urderthe Department of Food Technology & Qualty Control (DFTQC). and (b) 
completed all pre-requsr.es for ISO’lEC 17025 certification for either pyrethroid or caroarrate 
group pesticides testing in the Natonal Food and Feed Refe'erce Laboratory, h preparation 
for international accreditation.

5. MOALD shall have completed all pre-requ sites for ISO;EC 17025 certification
for molecular unit m the Central Animal ano Pojlt'y Disease Investigation Laboratory, m 
preparation for international accreditation.

6. MOALD shall have comoleted all pro-roqusites for ISOvEC 17025 certification
for new castle d.seosc vaccine production unit in the National Vacc ne Production -aboratory, 
in preparation for internal onal accreditation.

7. MOALD shall have competed all pre-requisites for ISO-IEC 17025 certification
'or PPR vaccine production unit in the National Vaccine Production Laboratory, in preparation 
'or International accreditation

8. GAN JAKI MOLMAC shall have approved and posted on government web $> les
operational guidelines for custom hiring of agricultural machinery, Including n'tor-salos service 
ard procedural -ecuirements: and approved sample business plans comprisng technical, 
financial. branding, and manceting aspects'or (a) custom hlrng of agricultural machinery, ano 
(b) al least two high-value commod tics

National Seed Board shall have approved min mum standards for establishing 
seed testing laborator a> of different categor es

11. MOALD shall have prepared a dralt Plant ^rotect on Regulation and submitted
’.o the Ministry of Law, Justice, and Parliamentary Abairs fo' consent.

12 GANDAKI MOLMAC shall have formulated and subm tted Io provincial cabinet
gendor-and socially inclusive provincial strategic Investment plan for at least one prioritized 
commodity and aligned it w th the provlnc a medium-term expenditure''amework (MTEF).



13
Attachment 3 to Schedule 3

13. To st'-er,gtincn institutional capacity io implement gerder*$en$itive and socially
ndusive agri-bus ness reforms,

(a) GANDAKI MOLMAC shell have designated a focal oerson or unit with clearly 
defined job descriptor! lo oversee ma nslreamirg cl gender equally and social 
Inclusion practices in Gandaki MOLMAC operations:

(b) GANDAKI MOLMAC shall have published a training manual fcr promotion of 
improved agricultural practices and agribusiness development, and deivered 
Iraning to at least '5C farmers (including indigenous peoples, other 
marginalized groups, and a: least 50% wren); and

(c) MOALD shall have conducted ADS oriental on workshops for at least 50% of 
local levels (mun cipalilies and rural municipalities) of Gandaki province 
Including orientation on gender equality and social inclusion strategy of the 
ADS.



14

SCHEDULE 4 

Program Implementation and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. MOF shall be lire Program Executing Agency. MOALO and GANDAKI MOLMAC
shall oc tho implementing agencies and shall be responsible for implementing their respective 
policy actions under the Program.

2. Within 60 days cf Ine Effective Dato., the Sorrower st all have expanded tho HLC
to induce representation from MOF and NPCS. which shall be responsible for overall 
supervision and coordination oftho implementation of the policy actions and other advdes for 
the Program.

3. With n 60 days of die Effective Date, the Borrower shall ensure that a separata
Working Committee is established under MOALD and GANDAKI MOLMAC. eacn of which shall 
bo responsible for coordination of tne implementation of their respective policy actions and 
activities under the Program.

Policy Actions and Dialogue

4. Tre Borrower shall ensure that all policy actions adopted under JicP'ogram.as
set forth n tno Policy Letter and the Policy Matrix, continue to be in effect for the duration o* 
the Program.

5. The Borrower shall keep ADB informed Curing periodic reviews of polcy
d scuss ons with other multilateral and bilateral aid agencies that may have implications for the 
imp ementation of lie Program and shall provide ADB with an oppertun ty to comment cn any 
resulting pol cy proposals. The Borrower shall take into account ADB's views cefcre finalizing 
and implement ng any such proposal.

6. The Borrower shall take all act ons wh ch shall be necessary on its pan to enable
the Province to perfoTi certain oblige: ons net are applicable to the Province as sot forth in 
the Polcy _et:er, and shall rot take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

7. The Borrower shall ensure and shall cause MOALD and GANDAKI MOLMAC to
ensure that the policy actions identified as hav ng potent al safeguards impacts are carried out 
In accordance with ADB s Safeguard Pol cy Statement (2QC9). Specifically, the training marual 
for promotion ol agribusiness and tho ensuing training shall have at least 50% women 
particicaton and shall ensure that nd gorous people are informed and 'epresented.

Use of Counterpart Funds

8 The Borrower shall ensure that the Counterpar Funds aro used to finance tho
Implementation Of Certain programs and activit cs oonsistort wit" the object ves ol the ^ogram.



15

Schedule 4

Governance and Articorruption

9. The Borrower, the Program Executing Agency. MOALD and GANDAKI
MO_MAC sha I (a) comply with ADB's Anticorrupticr Policy £1998. as amended to data) and 
acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly or through its agents, any 
alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive praodce rotating to the Program; and 
(b)coope'ale with any such invest galicn and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory 
completion of such investigation.

Monitoring and Revew

10. The Borrower shall ensure that HLC meets at least sem-annually and. if
needed, on an ad hoe basis to: (I) monitor the progress of the Program, (ii) provide gu dance 
and (fraction for program mplementaton to the Working Committee, and (iii) recommend 
adjustments or supplementary measures to facilitate and ensure timely implementation of the 
Program. ADR shall be invited to allene all meetings of HLC as an observer. Dosed on the 
feedback 'rorr the Working Committee and ADB. HLC shall, if nocossary, amend a^d revise 
its work, p-ograms to ensure t mely and effective implementation of the Program.

11. ADB shall undertake periodic review missions to: (a} confirm progress and
fulfilment of policy actions for tranche release; £h) confirm release of adequate 'unds from the 
Borrower for Program-spcc fic activit os, (c) monitor continued applicability of the assumptions 
that might impact Program success, as wel as specifies risks and their mitlgat ng measures 
one (d) advise on actions to maintain effective mplementaVon within tie Program period.




































































50013-002: Sustainable Tourism Development Project


LOAN NUMBER 3787-MON

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Sustainable Tourism Development Project)

between

MONGOLIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED. J2.lune 2.019

MON 50013



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated between
MONGOLIA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for two loans for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by an agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB 
(“Concessional Loan Agreement”) ADB has agreed to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s 
Ordinary Capital Resources, on concessional terms, nineteen million Dollars ($19,000,000) in 
connection with the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, except 
that the term “Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 7.01 (a)(i), 9.01(d), 9.01(f), 
9.01(k), 10.01(c) and 10.02(c) of the Loan Regulations shall be substituted by the term "the 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism of Mongolia or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB”.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "CKTC" means the Chinggis Khaan Tourism Complex in OBNP, as 
further described in the PAM;

(b) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations to be financed out of the proceeds of the 
Loan;



2

(c) “Environmental Management Plan" or "EMP" means the environmental 
management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the IEE;

(d) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(e) “Goods’* means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(f) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(g) "Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE" means the initial 
environmental examination for the Project, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(h) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(i) “KLNP" means Khuvsgul Lake National Park;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) “MoF” means the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower or its successor;

(I) ‘'Nonconsulting Services'* means nonconsulting services as described In 
the Procurement Regulations to be financed out of the proceeds of the 
Loan;

(m) “OBNP” means Onon-Balj National Park;

(n) "PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
14 March 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(o) "PILI" means the project implementation unit to be established at the 
Project Executing Agency as described in the PAM;

(p) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
14 March 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;



3

(q) "Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(r) “Procurement Regulations” means Procurement Regulations for ADB 
Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting Services and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(s) “Project Executing Agency” means the Ministry of Environment and 
Tourism of the Borrower or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(t) “Project Implementing Agencies" means the Department of Protected 
Area Management and Department of Tourism Policy Coordination 
under the Project Executing Agency or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB;

(u) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(v) “SGAP" means the social and gender action plan for the Project 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(w) “SPS” or "Safeguard Policy Statement" means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009); and

(x) ‘Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of nineteen million Dollars ($19,000,000), as such 
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 21 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.



4

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR;

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit
of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations; and

(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3,03 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn 
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement,

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 November and 15 May in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) . The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion 
of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding 
from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(f) of the 
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the Procurement Plan.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opin ion (s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



6

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the Concessional Loan Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: the 
event specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Concessional Loan Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower and shall have become fully effective and binding upon the Borrower 
in accordance with its terms, subject only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of MoF of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Government Building 2
S. Danzan Street 5/1 
Ulaanbaatar 15160 
Mongolia

Facsimile Number:

+976 51 267-468

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+63 2 636-2444 
+63 2 636-2534.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly.authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

MONGOLIA

By

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Mongolia Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is the achievement of sustainable and inclusive
tourism in the KLNP and OBNP.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Component 1: Enhance inclusive planning and capacity for community based 
tourism through strengthening the institutional framework for tourism planning 
and increasing the number of local beneficiaries from tourism by: (a) revising 
development plans for the three largest settlements at the KLNP and OBNP (two 
at the KLNP and one at the OBNP) to include livelihood targets, natural resource 
use and spatial planning for residents; (b) developing and implementing two 
tourism concession manuals, and an ecotourism certification program, for KLNP 
and OBNP; (c) strengthening the KLNP tourism council and creating a tourism 
council at OBNP; (d) installing information facilities in the Khuvsgul Aimag capital 
to promote KLNP products and services; and (e) increasing employment and 
business opportunities for local residents by providing vocational training for 
small businesses and installing tourist markets.

Component 2: Construct enabling infrastructure for tourism, comprising: (a) at 
KLNP (i) upgrade unsealed roads, (ii) construct car parks and (iii) improve traffic 
control and safety; and (b) at OBNP (i) construct the CKTC, (ii) establish 
supporting infrastructure, (iii) upgrade an access road and (iv) extend a power 
line to the CKTC site.

Component 3: Scale up waste management, including: (a) plan and coordinate 
the installation, operation and maintenance of low-cost sanitation systems at 
KLNP and OBNP; (b) construct three wastewater treatment plants suitable for 
cold climate; and (c) upgrade three landfill sites and establish new procedures 
for recycling and for leachate and waste management.

Component 4: Strengthen park management by: (a) constructing a KLNP 
headquarters and visitor center, two fee collection stations and a road control 
station; (b) rehabilitating public trails; (c) revising KLNP's and OBNP’s 
management plans; (d) preparing an action plan for each of KLNP and OBNP; 
and (e) training park and soum government staff to implement the revised plans.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2024.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by 
(b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.

Date Payment 
Due



2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates failing on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, 
to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies,

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 



12
Schedule 2

prior to said Conversion by either (a) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to 
said Conversion; or (b) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines, 
the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category "Interest and Commitment Charges” is for
financing interest and commitment charges on the Loan during the implementation period of 
the Project, ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf 
of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and 
commitment charges.

Reallocation

4, Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (I) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until ail 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account until the PIU has been established and has engaged a 
qualified project coordinator, financial specialist and procurement specialist.



15
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

* Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.
** Proceeds of the Concessional Loan Agreement for the corresponding category are to be fully utilized prior to 
disbursement of this loan for this category

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing

................... (S)........
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Civil Works* 13,870,238 100.0% of total expenditure 
claimed**

2

Goods, Consulting 
Services, Community 
Contracts, Workshops, 
PIU operating costs*

3,614,862 100.0% of total expenditure claimed**

3 Interest and
Commitment Charges 1,514,900 100.0% of amounts due

TOTAL 19,000,000



16

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and the Loan 
Agreements, the provisions of the Loan Agreements shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure close
coordination in implementing the Project with all relevant ministries, relating especially to the 
ministries that will be responsible for operation and maintenance of the project roads, landfill 
sites, wastewater treatment plants, and power lines. Without limiting the foregoing, a steering 
committee for the project shall be established by the Project Executing Agency and shall meet 
not less than quarterly during Project Implementation to oversee and ensure well-coordinated 
implementation of the Project. The steering committee shall be chaired by the State Secretary 
of the Project Executing Agency and shall comprise high-level officers from at least the 
ministries responsible for roads and transport, construction, urban development and energy, 
as well as from relevant departments of the Project Executing Agency,

Project Specific Assurances

Supporting Project Implementation

3. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Executing Agency, Khuvsgul Aimag government and the Khentii Aimag government 
will not issue any commercial tourism licenses or land entitlements for business activities within 
the KLNP or OBNP (including the OBNP buffer zone in Dada I Soum) until the following have 
been (a) completed, (b) approved by the Project Executing Agency, the aimag and soum 
governments, and ADB, (c) adopted by the Project Executing Agency and/or local government, 
and (d) commenced implementation: (i) tourism concession manuals for KLNP and OBNP; 
(ii) the Khankh Soum development plan for KLNP; and (iii) revised Khatgal Town development 
plan for KLNP and revised Dadal Soum development plan for OBNP.

4. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall provide or cause to
be provided adequate start-up capital to establish the holding company for the CKTC, as 
described in the PAM, to cover the costs of at least the first year of CKTC's operation and to 
cover further costs of operating CKTC until visitor revenue is sufficient to fund CKTC’s 
operating expenses.

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the Khentii Aimag power station and the power
transmission line from Ondorkhaan Town (also known as Chinggis Khaan Town) to Dadal 
Soum, are upgraded before the completion of construction of the CKTC to the extent necessary 
to ensure an adequate and reliable power supply to operate the CKTC.



17
Schedule 4

6. The Borrower shall ensure that the road from Onddrkhaan Town (also known
as Chinggis Khaan Town) to Dadal Soum is upgraded to repair the most damaged sections of 
the existing, unpaved, portions of the road and shall further exert best efforts to ensure paving 
and upgrading of the entire road (including the section of road from the Dadal Soum center to 
the CKTC) in close consultation with the Project Executing Agency, the Project Implementing 
Agencies and the PIU so as to ensure coordination and planning with the needs of the Project.

Supporting implementation of Project Safeguards

7. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall appoint officers to
act as focal points for the EMP and SGAP and ensure that these officers undertake regular 
coordination with and support for the environment and social specialists to be recruited by the 
PIU as provided in the PAM.

8. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Khatgal Town power substation (in Khuvsgul Almag) and Dada! Soum power substation (in 
Khentii Aimag) are adequately maintained and managed in order to: (a) provide the required 
power for Project facilities, especially the KLNP headquarters and visitor center in Khatgal 
Town and the CKTC in Dadal Soum; (b) ensure there is no disruption to the existing power 
supply for communities and services, including during winter and times of peak demand. If 
any changes are planned that may adversely affect the capacity or function of these power 
stations the Borrower shall: (a) inform ADB of the proposed changes; (b) if there is any potential 
adverse impact on the Project or any Project facilities, prepare and implement a corrective 
action plan as agreed with ADB.

9. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Executing Agency, Project Implementing Agencies and PIU to, ensure that: (a) public 
services for power, water supply, and wastewater collection at the KLNP and OBNP will be 
maintained for communities during the Project civil works; (b) any interruptions to such services 
which result from Project works will be as limited as possible; and (c) prior to any planned 
interruptions, meaningful consultations are held with all affected communities.

10. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
planting activities under the Project (a) occur only for rehabilitation of construction sites; 
(b) except as provided in (c), below, use only species that are native to Khuvsgui Almag, for 
KLNP, and that are native to Dadal Soum, for OBNP, and utilizing seedlings that are sourced 
from local stocks within Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Almag, respectively; (c) If fast-growing 
non-native species (e.g. grasses) are required for stabilizing bare surfaces of construction 
sites, use for such purpose only sterilized seedlings that cannot propagate; (d) do not use any 
invasive plant species; and (e) do not use pesticides or top-dressing fertilizers.

Tariffs for Wastewater and Solid Waste Management

11. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag governments (a) make 
continuous efforts to increase wastewater tariffs and solid waste management tariffs 
progressively to achieve full cost recovery and in accordance with national tariff policies and 
regulations; and (b) undertake at least once a year a periodic review of tariffs and fees including 
an assessment of their impact on the poor.



18
Schedule 4

12. During the process of adjusting wastewater tariffs and solid waste management
tariffs, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the Project 
Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag governments take into 
consideration (a) the minimum tariff level to cover basic operating costs, debt service and 
capital replacement; (b) users’ affordability and willingness to-pay data from available surveys; 
and (c) recent tariff escalations. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall 
ensure that the Project Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag 
governments include public consultation in their tariff setting processes.

Governance

13. The Borrower shall not withdraw any ADB loan proceeds until the Project
Executing Agency has engaged a project coordinator and Project financial specialist and a 
procurement specialist in accordance with the PAM.

Design and Quality Control Requirements

14. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, Project Implementing
Agencies and PIU to, shall ensure that:

(a) the detailed designs for the Project are completed in accordance with 
the Project implementation schedule as set forth in the PAM, but not 
later than 2 months before the start of the concerned Works;

(b) construction management, quality control, contract management, final 
completion and acceptance of all Works comply with all applicable laws 
and regulations of the Borrower and with all applicable requirements of 
ADB; and

(c) al! structures and facilities constructed or installed under the Project are 
well operated and maintained, and all operation and maintenance staff 
are fully trained in monitoring, operating, and maintaining the structures 
and/or facilities for which they are responsible.

Procurement

15. The Borrower shall, through the Project Executing Agency, ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and



19
Schedule 4

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

Safeguards

Conditions for Award of Works Contracts

16, The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
Works contract which involves environmental impacts is awarded until:

(a) the Project Executing Agency has endorsed the IEE; and

(b) the Project Executing Agency or the relevant Project Implementing 
Agency has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the 
Works contracts.

Environment

17, The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, the Project Executing
Agency, Project Implementing Agencies and PIU to, shall ensure that the preparation, design, 
construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and ali Project 
facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the SPS; arid (c) all measures and requirements set forth 
in the IEE and EMP and any corrective or preventative actions (i) set forth in a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report, or (ii) which are subsequently agreed between ADB and the Project 
Executing Agency.

18. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Project Executing Agency
shall ensure that: (a) during detailed engineering design of the CKTC, meaningful consultations 
are held with local residents, civil society organizations and other stakeholders to assess 
community concerns about the siting of the CKTC and its access road and to identify 
community-led or other solutions to address any community concerns; (b) the consultations 
include dissemination of all site-related information collected for the detailed designs, including 
the exact proposed location for the CKTC and access road; (c) if, following consultations, some 
stakeholders oppose the location of the CKTC, the PIU delivers a report and recommendations 
for resolution to the project steering committee and ADB and that the project steering 
committee confers with ADB on next steps; and (d) that design work and other preparation for 
the CKTC is suspended until siting issues are resolved in a manner acceptable to ADB.



20
Schedule 4

No Involuntary Resettlement or Indigenous Peoples Impacts

19. The Borrower shall ensure and shall cause the Project Executing Agency to
ensure that the Project does not have any involuntary resettlement impacts or indigenous 
peoples impacts within the meaning of the S PS. In the event that the Project does have any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, Project 
Implementing Agencies and PIU to, take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

20. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall make available
necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

21. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on the respective 
affected people under ADB’s Environmental Safeguards during 
construction), and the domestic environmental impact assessments, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in (i) a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report, or (if) subsequently agreed between ADB and the 
Project Executing Agency;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Project Executing Agency with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the IEE and the EMP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

22. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB in respect of 
implementation of and compliance with Environmental Safeguards and 
the EMP, semiannually during construction and the implementation of 



21
Schedule 4

the Project and the EMP, and thereafter annually during operation, until 
the issuance of ADB's Project completion report unless a longer period 
is agreed in the EMP; and disclose relevant information from such 
reports to the respective affected people under the Environmental 
Safeguards, the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards and the 
Indigenous Peoples Safeguards promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

23. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

24 The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the core
labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during 
Project implementation. The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency or the 
relevant Project Implementing Agency to include specific provisions in the bidding documents 
and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other 
things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate 
applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

25. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 24 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports as provided in the PAM.

Gender and Development

26. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a) the
SGAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts 
include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the SGAP; 
(c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the SGAP; and (d) progress on 



22
Schedule 4

implementation of the SGAP, including progress toward achieving key gender and social 
outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB.

27. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
“Consultation and Participation Plan" and “Stakeholder Communication Strategy” for the 
Project are fully implemented in accordance with their terms and that activities thereunder are 
regularly monitored and reported to ADB.

Counterpart Support

28. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall, and shall cause the
Project Executing Agency the Khuvsgul Aimag government, the Khentii Almag government 
and other government agencies to, ensure that (a) counterpart funds are made available to the 
Project in a timely manner, including any additional counterpart funds, as and when required, 
to meet any Project shortfall or cost overruns during Project implementation; and (b) operation 
and maintenance of all Project facilities is fully and timely funded. In addition to the foregoing, 
the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency and Project Implementing 
Agencies have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or 
Consulting Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

29. The Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, the Project
Implementing Agencies and the PIU to, (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998. as 
amended to date); (b) acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (c) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

30. The Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, the Project
Implementing Agencies and the PIU to, ensure that anticorruption provisions acceptable to 
ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts related to the Project, including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
Borrower, the Project Implementing Agency, the Project Executing Agencies, the PIU and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers as they relate to the Project.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

31. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that a
safeguards grievance redress mechanism acceptable to ADB is established at the Project 
Executing Agency and each Project Implementing Agency in accordance with the provisions 
of the IEE and EMP, within the timeframe specified in the I EE and EMP, to consider safeguards 
complaints.

Ownership and Control of Project facilities

32. In the event any change in ownership or control of any Project facilities is
anticipated, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall consult with ADB at 
least 6 months prior to the implementation of such change, and shall ensure that no change 



23
Schedule 4

will be made that will have an adverse impact on the implementation of the Project in 
accordance with the Project Agreement and the PAM.




































































50264-002: Agricultural Value Chain Competitiveness and Safety Enhancement Project


LOAN NUMBER 8389-CAM

LOAN AGREEMENT 

(Agricultural Value Chain Competitiveness and Safety Enhancement Project)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

dated 0 7 DEC 2020

CAM 50264



LOAN AGREEMENT

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 0 7 DEC 2020 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA (“Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB")

WHEREAS

(A) by a loan agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB 
("A Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from ADB's 
ordinary capital resources in an amount of seventy million Dollars ($70,000,000) ("A Loan') for 
the purposes of the project described in Schedule 1 to the A Loan Agreement (“Project”).

(B) the Borrower has also applied to Agence Franpaise de D6veloppement 
(“AFD”) for a loan ("AFD Loan") in Euros which is equivalent to twenty-five million Dollars 
($25,000,000) to assist in cofinancing a part of the Project, upon the terms and conditions 
set forth in a loan agreement between the Borrower and AFD (“AFD Loan Agreement");

(C) by an externally financed grant agreement of even date herewith between 
the Borrower and ADB ("JFPR Grant Agreement’), the Borrower has also applied to the Japan 
Fund for Poverty Reduction for a grant (“Grant") in the amount of three million Dollars ($3,000,000) 
to be administered by ADB for the purpose of the Project.

(D) the Borrower has also applied to ADB for a loan ("B Loan") for the purposes 
of the Project to be funded by ADB entirely from a participation by ASEAN Infrastructure Fund 
Limited (“AIF");

(E) by a participation agreement of even date herewith between ADB and AIF 
("Participation Agreement"), ADB has agreed to grant to AIF a participation in the B Loan 
(“Participation") on the terms and conditions set forth therein; and

(F) ADB has agreed to make a B Loan to the Borrower upon the terms and 
conditions set forth herein and in the Project Agreement of even date herewith between ADB and 
the respective PFIs;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

General Conditions; Definitions

Section 1 01 All the provisions of the General Conditions Applicable to 
Loans made by ADB Funded Through Participations of ASEAN Infrastructure Fund Limited, dated 
9 May 2017 ("General Conditions ), are hereby made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the 
same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject, however, to the following 
modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (dd) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor



2

“Project Agreement’ means the project agreement of even date 
herewith between ADB and a PFI, as such agreement may be 
amended from time to time; and such project agreement includes all 
schedules to the Project Agreement.

(b) The term "Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 6.01 (a)(i), 
8.01(d). 8.01(f). 8.01 (k). 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the General Conditions shall 
be substituted by the term “PFI".

(c) Section 3.02 (Interest) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Interest Charge. An interest charge at the rate specified in the 
Loan Agreement shall be payable on the principal amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time. 
The interest charge shall accrue from the respective dates on which 
amounts shall be withdrawn from the Loan Account. ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf 
of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet interest charge 
payments, when and if due.

(d) Section 3.03 (Commitment Charge; Maturity Premium) is deleted and the 
following is substituted therefor.

Computation of Interest Charge. The interest charge shall be 
computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months.

(e) Section 3.04 (Computation of Interest and Other Charges) is deleted and 
the following is substituted therefor:

Repayment and Prepayment. (a) The Borrower shall pay 
the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in 
accordance with the amortization schedule to the Loan Agreement.

(b) After giving not less than 45 days' written notice to ADB, the 
Borrower shall have the right to repay in advance of maturity, as of a 
date acceptable to ADB (provided, that the Borrower shall have paid 
all amounts due under the Loan Agreement as of such date): (i) all of 
the principal amount of the Loan then outstanding; or 
(ii) all of the principal amount of any one or more maturities of the 
Loan.

(c) If ADB shall at any time receive from the Borrower any amount 
which is (i) less than the full amount then due and payable to ADB in 
accordance with paragraph (a) of this Section; or (ii) less than the full 
amount repayable to ADB in accordance with paragraph (b) of this 
Section, ADB shall have the right to allocate and apply the amount so 
received in any manner and for such purposes under the Loan 
Agreement as ADB shall in its sole discretion determine.



3

(f) Sections 3.05 (Repayment and Prepayment), 3.06 (Rebate). 3.07 
(Surcharge) are hereby deleted.

(g) Sections. 3.08 (Place of Payment). 3.09 (Sale of Loan) and 3.10 (Change 
of Law) shall be renumbered as Sections 3.05. 3.06 and 3.07, respectively.

Sec tion 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several terms 
defined in the General Conditions and in the A Loan Agreement have the respective meanings 
therein set forth unless modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional term used in 
this Loan Agreement have the following meaning: “interest charge ’ means a charge made on the 
B Loan pursuant to Section 2.02

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01 (a) ADB agrees to make to the Borrower the B Loan in
an amount of five million Dollars ($5,000,000), with funds to be obtained entirely through the 
Participation in the B Loan by AIF

(b) The B Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means the 
period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the rate 
of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1 5% per annum thereafter on the on the amount 
of the B Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. Interest and other charges on the B Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2 04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the B Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement

ARTICLE III 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3 01. The Borrower shall relend a portion of the proceeds of the 
B Loan to each of the PFIs under a separate Subsidiary Loan Agreement for purposes of the 
Component 1 Each Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall provide inter alia for the relending of the 



4

proceeds of the B Loan to each of the PFIs, the carrying out of the Project, and the rights of the 
Borrower and ADB with respect thereto. Such Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall be in form and 
on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, and shall be without prejudice to. and without 
limitation on. the obligations of the Borrower under this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02 (a) Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds
of the B Loan made available to the PFIs shall be used only for making AIF Subloans to Eligible 
Sub-borrowers for AIF Eligible Activity and shall be applied exclusively to the cost of Goods, 
Works and Services and other items of expenditure required to carry out such AIF Eligible Activity.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the B Loan made applicable to 
the PFIs to be applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project, specifically for 
purposes of the AIF Eligible Activity by the Eligible Sub-borrowers, in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.03 The proceeds of the B Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.04 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of 
the B Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the A Loan Agreement.

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 of 
the General Conditions shall be 30 August 2027 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01 In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project 
facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in 
Schedule 4 to the A Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. In addition to the information and reports set forth in 
Sections 6 01 and 6 04 of the General Conditions, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be 
furnished, to ADB all such reports and information as ADB shall reasonably request concerning 
(a) the Eligible Sub-borrowers, the AIF Eligible Activity and the AIF Subloans; and (b) the 
administration, operations and financial condition of each PFI.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to inspect 
the Project, any Eligible Sub-borrower, any Eligible Activity, the Goods and Works, and any 
relevant records and documents

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate accounts
and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in accordance 
with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited 



5

annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are 
acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each 
such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinion(s) on the 
financial statements and the use of the B Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets 
out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the 
audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB. no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal 
year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the 
English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof 
as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the Project 
and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date of ADB's 
confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB's website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB. upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall authorize 
and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested 
by ADB This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an 
authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree

Section 4.05 The Borrower shall not take or permit any action which 
would interfere with the performance of PFI's obligations under this Loan Agreement or under the 
Project Agreement.

Section 4.06. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB 
and to accomplish the purposes of the B Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall be 
assigned, amended, abrogated or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB

Section 4.07. ADB's obligation to disburse any amount from the Loan 
Account shall be subject to ADB's receipt of a corresponding amount from AIF in accordance with 
the terms of the Participation Agreement. In the event AIF does not pay any amount of the 
Participation in the B Loan to ADB. ADB. by notice to the Borrower, shall cancel the corresponding 
amount of the B Loan.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01 The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the General Conditions:



6

(a) The Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
A Loan and shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation or 
shall have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date; and

(b) The Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
AFD Loan and shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation or 
shall have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date.

Section 5. 02 The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the General Conditions: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the General 
Conditions: the A Loan agreement will have been duly executed and delivered on behalf of, the 
Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness, other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, shall have been fulfilled

Section 6.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the General Conditions, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the A Loan Agreement has been duly authorized or approved by. and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in 
accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
General Conditions.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the General 
Conditions.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes of 
Section 11.01 of the General Conditions:



7

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance 
St. 92. Sangkat Wat Phnom 
Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

(855) 23 427-798
(855) 23 428-424

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their representatives 
thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in their respective 
names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the principal office of ADB.

Deputy Prime Minister 
Minister of Economy and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



9

nts for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4 03 of 
the General Conditions.



SCHEDULE 2

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the B Loan and the allocation of the B Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the B Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of B Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table.

(a) if the amount of the B Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category. ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the B Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB. are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the B Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category. ADB may. by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the B Loan proceeds shall be disbursed
in accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5 . Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for [Financial services Category] until Subsidiary Loan 
Agreements with both PFIs. in form and substance satisfactory to ADB. shall have been duly 
executed and delivered on behalf of respective PFI, and shall have become fully effective and 
binding on the parties thereto in accordance with their terms.



12
Attachment to Schedule 2

TABLE

• Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 2

ALLOCATION A ND WITHDRAWAL OF B LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for AIF Financing 

($)
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Cooperative support 2,772.000 100% of total expenditure claimed*
2 Financial services 2.000,000 100% of total expenditure claimed
3 Unallocated 228,000

TOTAL 5,000,000























































LOAN NUMBER 3977-NEP(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Priority River Basins Flood Risk Management Project)

between

NEPAL

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 22 DECEMBER 2020

NEP 52195



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 22 December 2020 between NEPAL ("Borrower”) 
and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("Grant Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB's 
Special Funds resources in an amount of ten million Dollars ($10,000,000) ("Grant”) for the 
purpose of financing expenditures under the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(b) “DHM” means the Department of Hydrology and Meteorology of the 
Borrower, or any successor thereto;

(c) “DWRI” means the Department of Water Resources and Irrigation of the
Borrower, or any successor thereto;



2

(d) “Environmental Management Plan" or “EMP” means each 
environmental management plan for the Project, including any update 
thereto, incorporated in the I EE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) “FOs” means the field offices for the Project established under the 
Project Executing Agency;

(g) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(h) “Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(i) “IEE” means each initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(j) “Implementing Agencies” means DHM and DWRI, or any successor to 
the foregoing acceptable to ADB;

(k) “IPP” means the indigenous peoples plan for the Project, and including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB, as described in paragraph 7 of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(I) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(m) “MEWRI" means the Ministry of Energy, Water Resources and Irrigation 
of the Borrower, or any successor thereto;

(n) "Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(o) "PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
August 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(p) “PIU” means the project implementation unit established in DHM;

(q) “PMU” means the project management unit established under the 
Project Executing Agency;



3

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
August 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(s) "Procurement Policy” means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(t) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(u) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means MEWRI, or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(v) "Project facilities” means the facilities to be constructed, rehabilitated or 
improved under the Project;

(w) "Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(x) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(y) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services; and

(z) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and Grant, 
including any related Nonconsulting Services and project related 
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey 
contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty million Dollars ($40,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.



4

(c) The term "grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE HI 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2027 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for
the Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the 
date of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss
the financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate 
to the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.



6

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Grant shall have become liable for 
suspension or cancellation.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on behalf of 
the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Secretary or Joint Secretary (International Economic 
Cooperation Coordination Division) of the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance 
Singhadurbar, Kathmandu
Nepal



7

Facsimile Number:

(977)1-4200537

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444 
(632)8636-2391.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

SHREEKRISHNA NEPAL 
Joint Secretary

International Economic Cooperation 
and Coordination Division 

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Officer-in-Charge
Nepal Resident Mission



8

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is improved resilience of communities to flood risks
of selected river basins in the Terai region of the Borrower.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) improved flood protection infrastructure, through (i) construction of flood 
control infrastructure; (ii) bio-engineering of river embankments for 
enhanced flood risk management; and (iii) development of maintenance 
manuals and asset management systems for flood protection 
infrastructure;

(b) enhanced systems for flood forecasting and response, through 
(i) installation of rain gauges and hydrometeorological stations; 
(ii) development of flood forecasting systems; and (iii) improved 
maintenance of flood forecasting early warning systems; and

(c) improved capacity for flood prevention and preparedness, through 
(i) implementation of a capacity-building program on flood risk 
management and infrastructure planning for DWRI and local 
governments; (ii) capacity-building of local communities on disaster 
preparedness; (iii) construction of flood shelters with gender-responsive 
features; and (iv) development of plans for community-based disaster 
risk management.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2027.

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge” is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



12
Schedule 3

Retroactive Financing

6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 
12 months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works and Consulting 
Services, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

ro 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Civil Works 29,570,000 83% of total expenditure claimed

2 Equipment 550,000 49% of total expenditure claimed

3 Consulting Services 2,470,000 79% of total expenditure claimed

4 Interest Charge 1,640,000 100% of amounts due

5 Unallocated 5,770,000

TOTAL 40,000,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with
the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) all positions identified as key personnel
within the PMU, PIU and FOs are filled for the full duration of the Project by individuals with 
adequate skills and expertise relevant to each position; and (b) vacancies in such positions, 
should they occur, are filled within 3 months.

Procurement

3. The Borrower shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

4. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract which involves environmental
impacts until:

(a) the Borrower's Ministry of Forests and Environment has granted the final 
approval of the IEE; and



15
Schedule 4

(b) the Government has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP 
into the Works contract.

Environment

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to environment, health and 
safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in 
each IEE and EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

6. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not have any involuntary
resettlement impacts, within the meaning of the Safeguard Policy Statement. In the event that 
the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure 
that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the 
Safeguard Policy Statement.

Indigenous Peoples

7. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not have any negative
indigenous peoples impacts, within the meaning of the Safeguard Policy Statement. In the 
event that the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take all steps required 
to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
and with the SPS, including preparation by the Borrower of an IPP, for submission to and 
clearance by ADB, and compliance with the measures and requirements set forth in such IPP,

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

8. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human resources
to fully implement the EMP and, if applicable, the IPP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

9. The Borrower shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works
contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE, 
the EMP and, if applicable, the IPP (to the extent they concern impacts 
on affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 



16
Schedule 4

arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the IEE, the EMP and, if applicable, the IPP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

10. The Borrower shall do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to affected persons 
promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP and, if applicable, the IPP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP or, if applicable, the IPP promptly 
after becoming aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

11. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan or Grant are used to
finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in 
Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

12. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect 
of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association 
and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage 
appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and 
to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

13. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 12 above and provide ADB with regular reports.



17
Schedule 4

Gender and Development

14. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with
its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors 
to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for 
implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported 
to ADB.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall make available, through budgetary allocations or other
means, all counterpart funds required for the timely and effective implementation of the Project, 
including funds required to (a) meet additional costs arising from design changes, price 
escalation in construction costs or other unforeseen circumstances; (b) ensure effective 
operation and maintenance of the Works, both during and after completion of the Project; and 
(c) ensure the Project Executing Agency and Implementing Agencies have sufficient funds to 
satisfy liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or Services contract.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

16. Within 3 months after the Effective Date, the Borrower shall prepare a grievance
redress mechanism acceptable to ADB, and establish a special committee to receive and 
resolve complaints/grievances or act upon reports from stakeholders on misuse of funds and 
other irregularities, including grievances due to resettlement. The special committee shall 
(a) make public the existence of the grievance redress mechanism; (b) review and address 
grievances of stakeholders of the Project, in relation to the Project, any of the service providers, 
or any person responsible for carrying out any aspect of the Project; and (c) proactively and 
constructively respond to such grievances.

Governance and Anticorruption

17. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, and the Implementing Agencies
shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge 
that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, 
fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any 
such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such 
investigation.

18. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, and the Implementing Agencies
shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding 
documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine 
the records and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, 
suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project.



























































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3932-BAN: Rural Connectivity Improvement Project - Additional Financing


LOAN NUMBER 3932-BAN(COL)
[Additional Financing to Loan 3731-BAN and Loan 3732-BAN(COL)]

LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Rural Connectivity Improvement Project - Additional Financing)

between

PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 30 JUNE 2020

BAN 47243



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 30 June 2020 between PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
BANGLADESH ("Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a loan agreement dated 13 January 2019 between the Borrower and 
ADB ("Initial Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide a loan from its ordinary capital 
resources in the amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000) (“Initial Loan”) to the 
Borrower for the purposes of financing expenditures of the project described in Schedule 1 of 
the Initial Loan Agreement (“Initial Project”);

(B) by a loan agreement dated 13 January 2019 between the Borrower and 
ADB ("Initial Concessional Loan Agreement”). ADB has agreed to provide a concessional loan 
from its ordinary capital resources in the amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000) 
("Initial Concessional Loan”) to the Borrower for the purposes of financing expenditures of the 
Initial Project:

(C) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
scaling up of the Initial Project, as described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(D) the Project will be carried out by the Local Government Engineering 
Department (“LGED”) under the Local Government Division of the Ministry of Local 
Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives, and for this purpose the Borrower will 
make available to LGED the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and 
conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “Community Participation Framework” or “CPF” means the community 
participation framework for the Project, including any update thereto, as 
agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(b) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(c) “Department of Environment” means the Borrower’s Department of 
Environment or any successors thereto;

(d) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Initial Project and 
revised for the Project, including any update thereto, and agreed to 
between the Borrower and ADB;

(g) “Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(h) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Initial Project 
as revised for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(i) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) “Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(I) "PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 29 
April 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from 
time to time in accordance with the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower and ADB;

(m) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
29 April 2020 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 



3

from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(n) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(o) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means LGED or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(q) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be improved, constructed or 
provided under the Project;

(r) "Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(s) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Target Areas” means the 16 districts in which the Project roads are 
located;

(v) “Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards” 
means the principles and requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 
3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources (concessional) an amount of one hundred million Dollars 
($100,000,000).



4

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 May and 1 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 May 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB. (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.



6

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional event for suspension 
of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the purposes of 
Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Initial Loan or the Initial Concessional Loan shall 
have become liable for suspension or cancellation in accordance with the terms of the Initial 
Loan Agreement or Initial Concessional Loan Agreement respectively.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for acceleration 
of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event specified in 
Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Senior Secretary, Secretary, any Additional 
Secretary. Chief, Joint Secretary, Joint Chief, Deputy Secretary, Deputy Chief, Senior 
Assistant Secretary, Senior Assistant Chief, Assistant Secretary or Assistant Chief of 
Economic Relations Division of the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Economic Relations Division
Ministry of Finance
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Sher-e-Bangla Nagar
Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh



7

Facsimile Number:

(880) 2-918-0788

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2340.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF
BANGLADESH

FATIMA YASMIN 
Secretary 

Economics Relations Division 
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
MANMOHAN PARKASH 

Country Director 
Bangladesh Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1 
t

Description of the Project

1 The objective of the Project is to increase transport efficiency and to generate
related employment in the Target Areas.

The Project will scale up the Initial Project and shall comprise improving the 
condition of approximately 930 km of rural roads to all-weather standards which incorporate 
climate resilience and safety features.

3 The Project is expected to be completed by 30 November 2023.

11

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1 The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5 Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Goods, Works and Services, 
subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.



12
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB

Financing 
($)

1

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

Category

1 Works 90,100,000 65% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 5,000,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

3 Unallocated 4,900,000

TOTAL 100,000,000
Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower



13

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that the Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the 
PAM Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such 
change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this 
Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency does not award 
any Works or Nonconsulting Services contracts until:

(a) the Department of Environment has granted the final approval of the 
IEE; and

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into 
the Works contract.



14

Schedule 4

Community Participation Framework (CPF)

4 The Borrower shall, or shall cause the Project Executing Agency to, implement
the CPF as agreed with ADB and in conformity with all relevant applicable laws and regulations 
of the Borrower.

5 The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure,
no section or part thereof under any Works contract awarded for the Project shall be handed 
over to the contractor unless the applicable provisions of the CPF have been implemented in 
full.

Operation and Maintenance

The Borrower shall ensure that it allocates sufficient funds for operation and 
maintenance of the roads to be constructed or upgraded under the Project, and ensure that 
the funds are made available to the Project Executing Agency on a timely basis for the same 
purpose.

Environment

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of 
the Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) 
all measures and requirements set forth in the I EE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Involuntary Resettlement and Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities

The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure 
that the Project does not have any Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards impacts or Tribes, 
Minor Races. Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards impacts. If the Project does have any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

The Borrower shall make available or cause the Project Executing Agency to 
make available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

10 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that all bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors 
to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people 



15

Schedule 4

during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that were not considered in the I EE or 
the EMP or any resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

11 The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation.or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

12 . The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13 . The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied 
with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing 
Agency includes specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB 



16

Schedule 4

under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect 
of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association 
and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage 
appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted 
diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and 
to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

14 The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency to strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 13 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Gender and Development

15 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and 
contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in 
the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets in the GAP are achieved.

Counterpart Support

16 The Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient
funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Works, Goods or Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

17 . The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18 The Borrower and the Project Executing Agency shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, 
consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project.




































































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3817-LAO: Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3317-I.AO(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector Project!

between

LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 30 OCTOBER 2019

LAO 5023G



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Oidinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 30 October 2019 between LAO PEOPLES 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC ('Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK {"ADB').

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower rias applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be partly carried out hv the provinces of Houaphan, 
Louangphabang. XalgnaboUji and Xiangkhouang ("Project provinces'), and for this purpose 
the Borrower will make available to the Project provinces a portion of the proceeds of the loan 
provided for herein upon terms and conditions acceptable to ADB:

(C) the Borrower has also applied to ADB tor a grant in an amount Oi five 
million Dollars ($5,000,000) from ADB's Disaster R^sk Reduction Fund ("DRRF Grant") for the 
purposes of the Project;

(D) the Borrower has also applied to the European Union for a grant ("Ei1 
Grant". together with DRRF Grant. "Grants") in an amount in Euro equivalent to four million 
four hundred sixty thousand Dollars ($4,460,090) for the purposes el the Project, and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADR's ordinary capital resources upon the tomia and conditions sei forth herein and in rhe 
Project Agreement between ADB and Project provinces;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as foilawe:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01 All provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01(uu) is deleter! and the following is substituted therefor

"Project Agreement" means rhe Project Agreement between ADB of one 
part, and Houaplian Province, Louangphabang Province. Xaignabouii 
Province and Xiangkhouang Province of the other part, as such 
agreement may be amended from time to time.



2

(b) The [erm "Project Executing Agency" appearing in Section G.01(3)0), 
8.01 (d), 8.01(f), 8.01 (k). 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the term "Houaphan Province, Louangphabang 
Province, X^Qmaboujj Province and Xiariglchouang Province"

Section 1^1 Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
ternis defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or I he context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set nut in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan.

(b) "EARP" means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB,

(c) 'EM?" means an environmental management plan developed for a
Subproject and approved by ADB:

(di "Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1. and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of Ihe 
SPS,

(e) "Goods" means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation commissioning, training. and initial maintenance,

(f) "HIV/AIDS" means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(g) "IEE" means each initial environmental examination for a Subproject, 
including any update thereto prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB

(h) "List of Eligible Subprojects" means a list which provides all candidate 
subprojects pre-screened in accordance with the criteria set forth in the 
PAM;

(I) 'Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (SOI7, as amended from time to lime):

(I) 'MAF means the Borrower's Ministry of Agriculture and F nrestry, or any 
successor(hereto

(k i "NonconsLilling Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



3

l it "PAFO' moans a provincial agriculture and Forestry office in a Project 
province or any successor thereto;

r। r।j "PAM" means the project administration manual for Uie Project dated 26 
July 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB. as updated from 
time to time in accordance will i the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower arid ADB;

(n) "Procurement Plan1' means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
26 July 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB as updated 
from time to time in accordance with Hie Procurement Policy, the 
Procuremient Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(o) ‘‘Procurement Policy" means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works. Nonconsulting and Consuliing Services (2017 as amended from 
time to time),

(pi 'Procurement Regulations'" means ADBJs Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods. Works Nonconsulling and Consulting 
Services (2017. as amended from time to time).

(q) "Project Executing Agency' for the purposes ol, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means MAF or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(r) "Project facilities" means facilities to be provided, constructed or 
operated and maintained under the Project;

(s) "Project province" means each of the Borrower's provinces of 
Houaphan, Louangphabang. Xaignabouli and Xiangkhouang, or any 
successors thereto:

(t) "’REGDF" means the resettlement and ethnic group development 
Framework tor the Project, as agreed between the Borrower and ADB;

(u) "RP" means each resettlement plan For a Subproject, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the REGDF and cleared by ADB:

(vj "RSP" means a representative subproject selected among the 
Subprojects, more fully described in the PAM;

(w) "SPS" means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(X) "Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of. and compliance with, the EMP and the RP (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(y) "Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services'



■I

(z) 'SubprajeGf means a subproject to be financed under the Project, as 
selected In accordance with paragraphs 18 to 26 of Schedule 4 to this 
Financing Agreement.

taa) 'UXO' means Lmexploded ordinance:

(bb) Works" means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurer nt’rd 
Rian and to be financed out of the proceeds ot the Loan and Grants, 
including any related Nonconsulling Services and project related 
services thai are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey 
contract;

(cc) WUA" means a water user association; and

(dd) "WUG" means a Water user group.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01 (a) ADB ogress to lend Io the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital lesources an amount of forty million Collars ($40 000,000}.

(b) T he Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (cj hereinafter

(c) The term "grace period' as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Pnncipal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2 02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1 5% per annum (hereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time io time.

Section 2.02 The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04 The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05 The currency of repayment of the principal amount Of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes Of Sections 4 03(a) 
and 4 04 pif the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall make available a portion of
the proceeds of the Loan to the Project provinces upon terms and conditions satisfactory to 
ADB

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively tn the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions of 
this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3 02 The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 3,04 (a) Withdrawals from the Laan Account in respect of
Goods, Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to

(I) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Warks and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(H) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time

(b) For purposes of subparagraph (a)(ii), Goods, Works, and Services may 
also be procured under the Project from non-member countries of ADB

Section 3.05 The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8 02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2027 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement



6

Sec tion 4.02 (a) The Borrower shall, or shall cause the Project
provinces to, (I) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual 
financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable 
to ADB; (III) have such financial statements audited annually Dy independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB. (iv) as part of each such audit have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinion^) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) 
furnish to ADB. no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB's website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower , unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03 The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Project provinces to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations: any of the DRRF Grant arid ELI Grant 
shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8 07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred



7

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6 01 The following is specified as an additional condition to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: all of DRRF Grant and EU Grant Agreements shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than a condition requiring 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11 02 of the Loan Regulations

Section 7 02 The following addresses are specified for the purposes
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
23rd Singha Road
P.O Box 46
Vientiane Capital
Lao People's Democratic Republic

Facsimile Number:

(856-21)412142

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADS Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines



8

Facsimile Numbers

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2366

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered st the 
principal office of ADB

LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC

Deputy Minister
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
ASUSHi NEGISHI
Country Director

Lao Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of Lhe Project

1 The objective of the Project is to improve high value agricultural production,
natural resources management ®nd community nutrition

2 The Project shall comprise th§ following outputs.

Output 1: Market-oriented agricultural production increased.

(a) Completing and confirming market demand assessments for all 
additional subproiect:

(b) Starling market connectivity forums and meetings in the RSPs;

(c) Confirming enterprise grants procedures and implementation 
arrangements and completing grant awards.

(d) Implementing Subproject farm to farm extension, and

(e) Operation a bzing market produce quality assurances systems

Out put 2: Watershed ecological services protected.

(a) Preparing Provincial land use plans (PLUPs) for catchments in four 
Xiangkhouang province and five Houaphan province productive rural 
infra structure subprojects (PRIs);

(b) Preparing PLUP associated land use behavioral change programs with 
supporting community agreements including female participation' and

(c) Implementing PLUPs land use behavior change action plans

Out put 3: Command area irrigation reliability improved.

(a) Contracting and completing RSP works:

(b) Designing and contracting additional PRI subprojects in batches 2 and 
3 with batch 3 being the final processing deadline, and contracting and 
completing Works with handover for batches 2 and 3;

(c) Farming WUGs and WUAs, including 507a participation by females, 
and water user management wilh 25% of female representation: and

(d) Organizing Subproject WUG into WUAs.

Out put 4 Nutrition awareness and facilities improved

(a) Forming and operationalizing district nutrition committees;



in
Schedule 1

(bj Implementing village nutrition schools, and

(c) Implementing Water sanitation and hygiene facilities In targeted 
villages.



SCHEDULES

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets Forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table") (Reference lo "Caregory" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the I. nan Account

2. Except as adb may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items Of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis oi the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure sei forth in the Table.

Kite re stC barge

3. The amount allocated to Category "Interest Charge' is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during I he implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itseft. on behalf of the BorroWef the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due. of such interest charge

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to he 
insufficient to finance ail agreed expenditures in that Category ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (1i) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made: and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears lo exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category

Dis burse pre nt Procedures

5 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disburse men! Handbook



Schedule 3

'condition,for Withdrawals 'mm Lnan Account

3, Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for Category 3 until the Borrower has issued guidelines 
lor usage of matching grant, in a form and substance satisfactory to ADB, including selection 
criteria and selection procedures for activities in accordance wiih the PAM.



15
Attachment lo Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Num her Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

(Dollar) _
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works for RSPs 2.316,170 34.7% of total expenditure claimed

2
Project Costs Other 
Than Category 1 above 
and Category 3 below

33,696,275 100% of total expenditure claimed

3 Matching Grant* 180,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

4 Interest Charge 1,523,445 100% of amounts due

5 Unallocated 2,284,110

TOTAL 40.000,000

Snt। eel to the cond lion tor withdrawal described >n paragraph 5 of Schedule 3



16

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Implementation, Environmental, Social and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that the Project is 
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the even I of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement, and DRRF Grant and EU Grant 
Agreements shall prevail.

Procurement

2 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that.

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in accordance 
with the ADB Procurement Policy and the Procurement Regulations,

(to) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth (he Procurement Plan including the procurement and 
selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and ADB's review 
requirements The Borrower may modify the detailed arrangements set forth in 
the Procurement Plan only with the prior agreement of ADB. and such 
modifications must be set out ip updates to the Procurement Plan: and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all computer
hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured or incorporated 
within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party: and 
(iij all contracts for the procurement of Goods. Works and Services contain 
appropriate representations, warranties and. if appropriate, indemnities from 
the contractor supplier consultant or service provider with respect to the 
matters referred to in I his subparagraph

Environment

3 . The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that the 
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; (b) the EARF: and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the respective 1EE and EMP, and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

4 The Eiorrower shall ensure the following measures are taken: (a) coordinate with the 
regulatory authorities to ensure agrichemicals are used in accordance with national laws and 
regulations and international conventions to which the Borrower is a signatory, (b) ensure that 
pest and/or vector management activities related to the subproject sites are based on 
integrated pest management approaches; (c) implement the training and related measures 



17
Schedule j

included rn the project's good agricultural practice capacity building program, and rd) Include 
a specific section in the semi-annual envi^riment safeguard reports on the application of 
agrichemicals.

5 The Borrower shall ensure that no subproject which meets the ADBs Category A 
environmental criteria as defined under the SPS, is included in the List of Eligible Subprojects, 
and that no subproject with Category A environ mental criteria is financed under ihe Project

6 The Borrower shall cause each Project province to establish river how gauging plates 
and lo provide, for each year, fortnightly readings of nvei flow during the dry season between 
1 October and 1 May throughout Project implementation

Inyoji1 nlary Resettlemerit

7 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that ail land and 
all rights-of-way required for each subproject and all Project facilities are made available to the 
Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under ihe related Works contract 
and all iand acquisition and re sett Ie me nt activities are implemented in compliance with (a) ad 
applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and fnvpluntafy 
rose tile meni^ (b) the REG DE and (c)al) measures and requirements set forth mtha respective 
RP. and any corrective or preventative actions set Forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

8 . The Borrower shall ensure that no subproject which meets the ADB's Category A 
resettlement criteria as defined under the SPS. is included in the List of Eligible Subprojects, 
and that no subproject with the Category A resettlement criteria is financed under me Project.

9 Without) jimrtihg the apptication of the REGDF or the RP, the Borrower shall ensure or 
cause the Project provinces lo ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes place 
m connection with the Subprojects until

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected people 
in accordance with the RP. and

Jb) a comprehensive income arid livelihood restoration program have been 
established in accordance with the RP.

10 The Borrower shall dlSO ensure that a grievance redress mechanism acceptable to 
ADB is established for affected people in the districts where the resettlement activities under 
the Project are carried out.

'indigenous Peoples arid Vulnerable Groups

11 . The Borrower shall ensure that subprojects do not adversely affect ethnic groups, 
households headed by women disabled, elderly or other similarly vulnerable groups, and that 
rights and needs of ethnic groups are fully addressed in accordance with ADS's Policy on 
Gender and (development (1998) and SPS. in particular the Project shall be carried out in 
accordance with the REGDF.

12 The Borrower shall ensure that no subprojects which have significant impacts on ethnic 
groups, is included in the List of L-ligible Subprojects, and that no Subproject with such impacts 



10
jr,neoule 4

is financed under the Project. For Subprojects In which ethnic groups are present and affected, 
an tn dig eno us peoples plan shall be prepared in accordance with the REGDF

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Prelect provinces to ensure that all bidding 
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require con tractors to

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor set forth 
in the IEE, the EMP, and the RP (to the extent they concern Impacts on affected 
people during construction}, and any corrective or preventative actions set out 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

(b) make available a budget for all such environ mental and social measures, and

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated environmental, 
resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were not 
considered in the IEE, the EMP or the RP

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14 The Borrower shall do the following or shall cause the Project provinces to do the 
following.

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly upon 
submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were not 
considered in the IEE. the EMP or the RP. promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks Or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures and 
requirements set forth in the EMP or the RP promptly after becoming aware of 
the breach.

Human and Fmoncla! Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

15 . The Borrower shall make available or shall cause the Project provinces Io make 
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP and the RP 
In particular. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure dial the 
environment consultants, whose qualification are acceptable to ADB, are engaged and 
deployed in a timely manner



19
Schedule 4

Prohibited List of Investments

16 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that no proceeds 
of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS

Gender and Development

17 The Borrower, through MAF, shall ensure that me gencfer mainstreaming activities are 
(a) incorporated into the Project design and undertaken during Project implementation, and (b) 
monitored by the Division Advancement of Women within MAF

Grievance Redress Mechanism

16 . The Borrower shall ensure that safeguards grievance redress mechanisms acceptable 
to ADB are established in accordance with Ihe provisions of the EARF, EMP and RP at the 
project management office, within the timeframes specified in the relevant IEE EMP and RP 
to consider safeguards complaints.

Subproject Eligibility and Priority

19 , i he Borrower shall ensure that only candidate subprojects listed in the List of Eligible 
Subprojects are considered for financing under the Project

20 The Borrower shall ensure that candidate subprojects m each Project province are 
taken up in the order of priority indicated in the List of Eligible Subprojects and shall cari^y out 
feasibility studies and detailed design for such candidate subprojects

21 . The Borrower shall require oi cause the Project Provinces to require certification of 
UXO safety to be issued lor each Subproject through the office of Provincial Governor. Where 
UXO clearance is required, the Borrower shall arrange and finance this work, using the 
Borrower's UXO trust fund in accordance with its standard procedures. The UXO clearance 
requires a 12-month notification for inclusion in the Borrower programs.

Feasibility Study and Detailed Engineering Design Review

22 . After completion of the combined feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs 
(design report), candidate subprojects shall be reviewed by PAFO who shall report to the 
Provincial Steering Committee, and shall be taken up for physical implementation only if (a) 
the concerned WUGs commit to paying the irrigation service fees at a level that meet the 
requirement ol the operation and maintenance plans as approved by the Loan Implementation 
Consultant: and (b) they meet the selection criteria as provided in the PAM

23 . In case that a candidate subproject does not meet the criteria provided rn the PAM, it 
shall be replaced by the next priority candidate subproject for the respective Project province 
under the List of Eligible Subprojects If candidate subprojects not listed in the l.ist of Eligible 
Subprojects are to be considered for financing under the Project, they shall be examined and 
screened by MAF with the support from an independent consultant acceptable to both ADB 
and the Borrower and submitted to ADB for approval



2D
Schedule 4

Proiect Irrigation Scheme

2*1. fhe Borrower shall ensure that (a) each irrigation scheme to be developed under the 
Project shall ho longer be included in the prowincial or national register of required rice 
production aieas for the dry season, (b) the irrigation schemes io the Project shall have 
completed irrigation management transfer processes with both WUG and WUAs established 
prior to the award of any related Works contract and shall toimaily Identify the required 
irrigation service fee to enable operation and maintenance Of the irrigation command area, and 
(cj the use of the irrigation service tee collected by WUAs in the Project irrigation schemes 
Shall be limited to the operation and maintenance requirement of the scheme until such time 
when the WUAs' bank account has a year-end balance of a! least two years operational and 
maintenance requirements, and the WUAs. based on majority member, will distribute to village 
or district officials any funds in excess of this amounl

l abor Standards, Health, and Safety

25 . The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower's applicable 
laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation The Borrower shall 
include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the 
Project requiring that the contractors, among other things, (a) comply with the Borrower's 
applicable labor law and regulahons and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety 
norms, (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and 
occupation, (d) do not use forced labor (e)do not restrict the workers from developing a legally 
permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working 
conditions and terms of employment, and (fl disseminate, of engage appropriate service 
providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases incktding 
HIV/AID8, to rhe employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the 
local communities surrounding the Project area particularly women The Borrower shall strictly 
monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Counterpart Support

26 . The Borrower shall ensure that the counterpart funding required tor successful Project 
implementation is timely allocated and provided The Borrower through MAP and Project 
provinces, shall ensure that qualified staff are added to the project management units in a 
timely manner

27 . In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that MAP and the Project 
provinces have sufficient funds to satisfy 'heii liabilities arising from any Works. Goods pnd/or 
Services contract.

Financial Ma nag en lent

26 . The Borrower shall implement the financial management plan as agreed with ADB and 
set forth in the PAM. In particular, the Borrower shall {a) make available the government staff 
in sufficient numbers and with the required academic background and/or experience, as per 
the positions and the timelines in accordance with the PAM; (b) ensure that he standardized 
financial management manual for Project is developed and agreed by the Borrower's 
concerned ministries prior to the commencement of any activities under the Project, and (c) 
undertake monitoring of the implementation of the financial management plan.



21
Schedule 4

Malching Grant

29 rhe Borrower shall implement activities to be financed by the matching grant tn 
accordance with its guidelines, and report to ADB details of the activities on an annual basis.

Governance and Anti corruption

30 . The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB's Anti corruption Policy (1998, as amended to 
date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through its agents 
any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the Project, and 
(b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory 
completion of such investigation

31 The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are 
included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the light of 
ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing 
agencies and all contractors suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate 
to the Project.






































































51423-002: Vegetable Production and Irrigated Agriculture Project


LOAN NUMBER 3896-MON

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Vegetable Production and Irrigated Agriculture Project)

between

MONGOLIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 5 MAY 2020

MON 51423



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 5 May 2020 between MONGOLIA (“Borrower”) and 
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has also applied to ADB for a concessional loan (“COL 
Loan”) in an amount of twenty-five million three hundred thousand Dollars ($25,300,000) to 
assist in financing the Project from ADB’s ordinary capital resources, upon the terms and 
conditions set forth in a loan agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“COL Loan 
Agreement”, together with this Loan Agreement, “Loan Agreements”);

(C) the Borrower has also applied to the Japan Fund for Poverty Reduction 
for a grant (“JFPR Grant”) in an amount of two million Dollars ($2,000,000) to assist in financing 
a part of the Project and to be administered by ADB, upon the terms and conditions set forth 
in a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“JFPR Grant Agreement”); and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “CGG” means a community grower group to be supported under the 
Project;

(b) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



2

(c) “DEIA" means a Detailed Environment Impact Assessment, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

(d) “EBA” means an environment baseline assessment for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(e) “EMDP” means ethnic minority development plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(f) “EMP” means the consolidated environmental management plan for the 
Project, including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(i) “GEIA” means a General Environment Impact Assessment, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

(j) “Goods" means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(k) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(I) “IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(m) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(n) “MET” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Environment and Tourism, or 
any successor thereto;

(o) “MOF” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Finance, or any successor 
thereto;

(p) “MOFALI” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Food, Agriculture, and Light 
Industry, or any successor thereto;



3

(q) “Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(r) “O&M” means operation and maintenance;

(s) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 18 
December 2019and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(t) “PIU” means a Project implementation unit established within MOFALI;

(u) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated - 
18 December 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, 
the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(v) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(w) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(x) “Project Executing Agency” for the purpose of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means MOFALI, or any successor acceptable 
to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the Project;

(y) “Project facilities” means facilities to be constructed, procured, 
rehabilitated and/or maintained under the Project;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation and compliance with the EMP, including any corrective 
and preventative actions;

(aa) “SDAP" means the social development action plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(bb) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(cc) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009); and

(dd) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.



4

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of fourteen million seven hundred thousand Dollars 
($14,700,000), as such amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency 
Conversion in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 19 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR;

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit
of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations; and

(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn 
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 August and 15 February in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion 
of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding 
from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and



5

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(f) of the 
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3. 03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 March 2027 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall perform, or cause 
to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 



6

management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, 
shall enable ADB’s representatives to inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any 
relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: any of the COL Loan and JFPR Grant 
shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: the 
event specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: all of the COL Loan Agreement and the JFPR Grant Agreement shall have been 
duly executed and delivered, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than a 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.



7

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of MOF of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Government Building 2
S.Danzan Street 5/1
Ulaanbaatar-15160
Mongolia

Facsimile Number:

(976-11)320247

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2407.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

Country Director 
Mongolia Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase efficiency of climate resilient
agricultural production and marketing.

2. The Project shall comprise the following outputs.

Output 1: Efficient and climate-resilient irrigation infrastructure and 
management systems installed. Upgrading, modernizing and climate­
proofing selected irrigation systems along with directly associated infrastructure 
providing irrigation services for 7,000 ha.

Output 2: Environmentally sustainable production systems improved. 
Improving food safety, environment sustainability and climate resilience of 
agriculture production systems, through (a) supporting the National Institute for 
Plant Protection with testing equipment and reagents for additional testing 
capacity; and (b) supporting, through the coordination of the national extension 
center, four regional crop research institutes with: (i) provision of equipment and 
facilities such as climate-controlled growth chambers, storage cool rooms, 
sheds, fencing, mechanization packages, seed cleaning and packaging 
equipment, conservation farming equipment, and teaching facilities; (II) small- 
scale irrigation rehabilitation and modernization; and (Hi) greenhouses including 
low-carbon options for extending cropping seasons, high value vegetable 
cultivation and quality seedling production.

Output 3: Technical, institutional and management capacity and 
coordination strengthened. Setting up CGGs in the selected irrigation 
systems and providing training on improved vegetable production for CGG 
participating farmers in collaboration with crop research institutes, and providing 
mechanization technology packages, all-weather greenhouses with solar- 
powered heating and long-life films, and small cool rooms for product storage.

3. Parts of Output 1 and Output 3 shall be financed by the JFPR Grant.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 September 2026.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.

2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, 
to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal in 
said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to 
said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines, 
the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.



12

Schedule 2

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest and Commitment Charges” is for
financing interest and commitment charges on the Loan during the implementation period of 
the Project. ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf 
of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and 
commitment charges.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Goods and Works3 11,391,228 100% of total expenditure claimed*

2 Services3 805,084 100% of total expenditure claimed

3 Interest andCommitment Charges 837,396 100% of amounts due

4 Unallocated 1,666,292

TOTAL 14,700,000
Exclusive of VAT and duties.

a Proceeds of the COL Loan Agreement for the corresponding category are to be fully utilized prior to
disbursement of this loan for this category.



15

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Environment, Social, Financial and Other Matters

General Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and the Loan 
Agreements, the provisions of the Loan Agreements shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that an
implementation agreement shall be entered into with each aimag government which shall 
among things (a) define aimag government responsibilities for operating and maintaining the 
irrigation systems, (b) ensure sufficient amount of funding for maintenance is in place in the 
aimag annual budget, (c) ensure small-farmers are the beneficiaries of the irrigated systems 
for at least 15 years (land lease agreement period), (d) have appropriate systems in place for 
selecting land leasers to be included in the irrigated systems area, (e) ensure there are 
transparent irrigation fee systems in place which shall cover, at least partially, O&M costs.

Procurement

3. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

4. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall not award any
Works contract, and shall ensure no Works contract is awarded, which involves environmental 
impacts until the Project Executing Agency has:



16

Schedule 4

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE from the Borrower’s relevant 
authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

Counterpart Funds

5. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a)
counterpart funds are made available to the Project in a timely manner, including additional 
counterpart funds, as and when required, to meet any Project shortfall or cost overruns during 
Project implementation; and (b) O&M of all Project facilities is fully and timely funded. In 
addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has 
sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from Works, Goods, and/or Consulting Services 
contracts.

Environment

6. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, commissioning, implementation and operation of the project 
and all Project facilities comply with: (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower 
relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all 
measures and requirements set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative 
actions (i) set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report, or (ii) which are subsequently agreed 
between ADB and the Borrower. In case of any discrepancy or inconsistency among the 
Borrower’s laws, regulations and procedures relating to environment, health and safety and the 
SPS, the SPS shall prevail.

7. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
Works shall be conducted for a subproject until domestic requirements for environmental 
assessment have been completed and approved by the relevant domestic agencies. This shall 
include, but not be limited to: (a) the preparation of an EBA for each subproject by a certified 
domestic agency, and the submission of this assessment to MET for review; (b) the issuance 
of a GEIA Letter by the MET, which endorses the subproject EBA and clarifies whether a DEIA 
is required; (c) the preparation of a DEIA for each subproject, as required; and (d) subsequent 
review and approval of the DEIAs by MET. The Borrower, through the Project Executing 
Agency, shall further ensure that any environmental safeguard conditions specified by MET for 
any subproject, through the GEIA Letter, DEIA, or other means, which are not covered under 
the project EMP, shall be (i) integrated in the EMP, and (ii) included in all bidding documents.

8. After completion of the EBA, GEIA, and/or DEIA for each subproject, the
Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall submit the following documents to ADB 
for review: (a) the summary findings of the EBA, GEIA Letter, and DEIA; and (b) English- 
language translations of the GEIA Letter and MET letter of conclusion following completion of 
the DEIA. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that any findings 
or conclusions that represent new safeguard risks and/or mitigation tasks or costs which are 
not already included in the EMP, shall be discussed between MET, MOFALI, PIU and ADB 
and any additional requirements shall be included in the EMP.



17

Schedule 4

9. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that, in
compliance with SPS, an ecological survey for rare, threatened and restricted-range species 
and their uses of the subproject area will be implemented, by a certified biodiversity 
specialist(s) and using an internationally accepted survey methodology for Okhindiin Tai 
subproject. The resulted assessment shall (a) cover the ecological values of the specific 
subproject area, (b) strengthen the preliminary ecological impact assessment undertaken in 
the IEE, (c) develop detailed mitigation measures, and (d) conclude on the final net (residual) 
ecological impacts and whether these are acceptable under the SPS and/or national 
regulations. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall further ensure that 
such assessment will be undertaken before the detailed engineering designs are completed 
and approved, and can be done as part of, or in parallel with, the DEIA. No works shall 
commence for the subproject before ADB and the Borrower have reviewed and approved the 
ecological survey, impact assessment, and detailed engineering designs.

10. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
pesticides or other chemicals classified as “hazardous" or restricted-use by the World Health 
Organization or the government will be funded by the project. Prohibited chemicals shall 
include omethoate and methamidophos (pesticides) and bromadolion (a rodenticide).

11. In compliance with national requirements for the provision of environmental
flows, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the water 
allocation extraction volumes calculated for each subproject for environmental flows and 
irrigation (and which are included in lEE’s Appendix 5 and the feasibility study reports for each 
subproject) are included in detailed engineering designs and complied with. The Borrower, 
through the Project Executing Agency, shall further ensure that, for this purpose: (a) water 
extraction for each subproject will be monitored on a monthly basis by each soum government 
Project coordinator; (b) the monitoring results will be reported on a monthly basis to the 
subproject soum government and PIU, and compared against the monthly environmental flow 
rates calculated for each project river; (c) the monitoring results will be submitted at least 
annually to the relevant River Basin Administration responsible for the subproject rivers, for 
review and confirmation that extraction volumes comply with the permitted allocations; and (d) 
based on these comparisons, corrective actions will be identified in the event that irrigation 
water extraction is clearly exceeding the modeled acceptable extraction volumes.

12. For the associated facilities to the Project, as provided in the PAM, the
Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that they are maintained in 
accordance with domestic requirements for environmental management, including, but not 
limited to, environmental safety measures, water allocation approvals, and worker and 
community health and safety. In case any changes are made to such existing facilities which 
would significantly impact their capacity or function and as a result the viability of the Project, 
the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall immediately advise ADB of such 
changes, and the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall assess the Project 
impact and prepare a corrective action plan, if necessary, to be agreed with ADB.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples

13. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project does not have any indigenous peoples or involuntary resettlement impacts, all within 
the meaning of SPS. In the event that the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower, 
through the Project Executing Agency and other agencies as necessary, shall take all steps 



18

Schedule 4

required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower, the resettlement framework and with SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards and Social Requirements

14. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall make available
necessary human and budgetary resources to fully implement, as applicable, the EMP, SDAP 
and GAP.

Safeguards-Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

15. The Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency and PIU to,
ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works contain specific provisions that 
require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on the respective 
affected people under the Environmental Safeguards during 
construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in (i) 
a Safeguards Monitoring Report, or (ii) subsequently agreed between 
ADB and the Borrower;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous people risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the project that 
were not considered in the IEE and the EMP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

16. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall:

(a) submit Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB semiannually during 
construction and the implementation of the Project and the EMP, and 
thereafter annually during operation, until the issuance of ADB’s Project 
completion report unless a longer period is agreed in the EMP, and 
disclose relevant information from such reports to the respective affected 
people under the Environmental Safeguards, promptly upon submission; 
and

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event 
and proposed corrective action plan.



19

Schedule 4

Gender and Social Development

17. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a) the
GAP and SDAP are implemented in accordance with their terms; (b) the bidding documents 
and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth 
in the GAP and SDAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP 
and SDAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP and SDAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender and social outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored 
and reported to ADB.

Works Contract

18. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the core
labor standards and the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower are complied with 
during Project implementation. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall 
include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the 
Project requiring that the contractors, among other things (a) comply with the applicable labor 
law and regulations of the Borrower and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety 
norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and 
occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from developing a legally 
permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working 
conditions and terms of employment; (f) do not delay any lawful payment to the workers; and 
(g) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the 
risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall further 
ensure that this paragraph shall be applicable to any workers regardless of their nationality, 
and strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide 
ADB with semiannual reports.

Grievance and Redress Mechanism

19. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that
safeguards grievance redress mechanisms acceptable to ADB are established in accordance 
with the provisions of the IEE and the EMP at the project management office, within the 
timeframes specified in the relevant IEE and EMP, to consider safeguards complaints.

Household connections

20. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that water
supply to all households within the water supply network under the Project is in operation with 
adequate connections by the Project completion.

Land Leasing

21. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, , shall ensure that the
existing land lease contracts for irrigation systems to be covered by the Project for which land 
has been leased out by the soum governments to farmers and companies for agriculture 
purpose, the existing terms and conditions of the lease are maintained. The Borrower shall 
ensure by causing MOFALI to issue a letter to soum governments involved in the project that 



20

Schedule 4

they shall not revoke land possession rights issued to farming households. Forthose irrigation 
systems with which the land lease contracts are not yet in place, the Borrower, through the 
Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all farmers have a certificate, a map of the leased 
land and a contract, with the land lease contracts with the terms and conditions which are (a) 
in line with the principle of fairness and equity; (b) reflect the willingness of households who 
are leasing land; and (c) are in line with the Borrower’s Land Law and Crop Planting Law, and 
relevant requirements by ADB.

Governance and Anticorruption

22. The Borrower shall and shall cause the Project Executing Agency and other
government agencies involved in the Project to comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, 
as amended to date) and the Borrower acknowledges that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project. The Borrower agrees to cooperate, and to cause the Project Executing 
Agency and all other government offices, organizations and entities involved in implementing 
the Project to cooperate, fully with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance, 
including providing access to all relevant books and records as may be necessary for the 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

23. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of the Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, the PIU, other government 
agencies involved in the Project, and all contractors, suppliers, consultants and other services 
providers as they relate to the Project.





